Energy 273 (2023) 127213
Available online 15 March 2023
0360-5442/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Hierarchical approach to energy system modelling: Complexity reduction 
with minor changes in results 
Dmitrii Bogdanov *, Ayobami Solomon Oyewo, Christian Breyer 
LUT University, Yliopistonkatu 34, 53850, Lappeenranta, Finland   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Handling Editor: Neven Duic  
Keywords: 
Energy system modelling 
Renewable energy 
Optimisation 
Defossilisation 
A B S T R A C T   
The energy transition plays a crucial role in the ongoing process of defossilisation and carbon emissions 
reduction. Considering the substantial cost of the transition and importance of the energy system for the global 
economy, the transition must be accurately modelled to allow future system development analyses and discus-
sions to avoid stranded investments and guarantee a reliable energy supply at every transition step. Energy 
system models must be operated with a technology-rich portfolio in high temporal and spatial resolution to 
properly estimate the impact of renewable energy variability and the role of storage and sector coupling tech-
nologies. Consequently, modern energy system models comprise tens of millions of variables and constraints, and 
demand vast computational resources for optimisation. This study proposes a hierarchical approach to run 
simulations based on partial regional disaggregation as a solution to decrease computational time without sig-
nificant change in the modelling results. The discussed method is tested on the case of Japan and shows that the 
hierarchical approach allows for a reduction in computational time by a factor of 2.3–3.3 compared to the full 
spatial resolution simulation approach, while the installed capacities and costs of the energy system stay within a 
±3% range for all steps of the transition through 2020 to 2050.   
1. Introduction 
Evidence of the ongoing climate change process is strong and is hard 
to disregard [1]. Together with improved understanding of the 
long-term effect on civilisation and the role of anthropogenic green-
house gas (GHG) emissions in the climate change process, the interna-
tional 
community, 
individual 
countries, 
cities, 
societies 
and 
stakeholders have been pushed to foster GHG emissions reduction efforts 
across all human activities, in particular in the energy system, which 
contributes the highest share [1]. The global community has pledged 
GHG emissions targets to keep the global warming effect at the level of 
1.5 ◦C, as aimed for in the Paris Agreement. This target will ultimately 
demand a rapid reduction of GHG emissions in the coming decades and 
full carbon neutrality by 2050, or even negative CO2 emissions in the 
2040s and beyond. Most importantly, the target demands fast and sharp 
changes in the energy system, as it is responsible for about 80% of global 
GHG emissions [2]. Thus, the energy transition will play a vital role in 
the defossilisation of energy and the economy in general on the way to 
full carbon neutrality. The transition towards renewable energy (RE) 
does not simply fit the emission reduction narrative, it also leads to a 
low-cost energy supply and lower reliance on energy imports, as the 
access to low-cost RE sources [3,4], the ongoing progress in energy 
storage technology, modern electrified mobility, and industrial pro-
cesses are new drivers for the energy transition. Energy system electri-
fication will lead to comprehensively integrated and coupled energy 
sectors [5,6] with new emerging technologies such as CDR [7] and 
desalination [8] and, consequently, to significant growth of the overall 
system efficiency and further energy cost decline [8,9]. 
The energy transition towards higher shares of renewables in the 
energy supply, higher electrification, and comprehensive energy sector 
integration is a sophisticated process that demands significant time and 
investments. That makes the proper long-term planning extremely 
important to choose an optimal transition pathway that avoids stranded 
investments and reaches the climate targets in time. Many energy system 
models have been developed in recent years to support decision making 
[10,11]. The main trend in energy system modelling development is the 
growing complexity of the applied models following important re-
quirements. First, a high temporal resolution is required to properly 
consider the effects of the variable RE (VRE) sources and estimate de-
mand in storage capacity and other flexibility options, and hourly 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: dmitrii.bogdanov@lut.fi (D. Bogdanov).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Energy 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/energy 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2023.127213 
Received 27 September 2022; Received in revised form 10 January 2023; Accepted 12 March 2023   
Energy 273 (2023) 127213
2
resolution has been found to allow adequate simulation of the operation 
of VRE based systems [12]. For fossil-based systems and systems with 
high shares of fossil fuels, less advanced annual balancing models in 
hourly resolution can still be used [10,13]. Second, a multi-nodal 
approach to enable a sufficiently high spatial resolution must be 
considered to avoid any copper plate effect [14,15], which leads to 
averaging of RE generation profiles and leads to an underestimation of 
RE generation variability [16,17] and grid interconnection costs [5]. 
System integration simulation requires technology-rich portfolios of 
models, the broad application of sector coupling technologies, and 
simulation of all energy system sectors in one run. That can be seen in 
the energy system models portfolio, as shown by Lopez et al. [18]. Most 
of the active models use full hourly resolution (EnergyPLAN [19,20], the 
LUT Energy System Transition Model (LUT-ESTM) [8,21–23], HOMER 
[24], REMix [25], AU model [15], PyPSA [26], LOADMATCH [27], 
NEMO [28], ISA model [29], H2RES [30]) or at least a time-slices 
approach (TIMES [31], GENeSYS-MOD [32]). More than half of the 
models introduced a multi-nodal approach to simulation. Also, models 
are developed to introduce more energy sectors rather than study only 
the power sector and model the individual sectors in higher detail, for 
example, tracing non-energetic demand of fuels and chemicals in 
various industries, and CO2 emissions from limestone processing in the 
latest versions of LUT-ESTM [23], PyPSA [33], or versions of TIMES 
[34]. Furthermore, the transition pathway optimisation demands energy 
system optimisation for each step of the transition, for the case of a 
myopic approach, or all the transition at once, for the case of a perfect 
foresight approach. Independent of the approach, the transition opti-
misation leads to longer modelling time. 
Such model development and expansion and continued improve-
ments of all these aspects lead to the continuous growth of the model 
size. In the LUT-ESTM tool, the number of variables is already in the 
order of millions for single node and tens of millions for multi-node 
simulations, and that consequently increases the demand for computa-
tional capacities and the time for optimisation. Despite the growing 
computational capacities, novel approaches in energy system modelling 
are needed to decrease energy systems simulation complexity without 
loss of the RE technologies simulation reliability and allow further 
growth in detailing of energy system models, in particular broader 
technology portfolios, higher regional, and temporal resolution. New 
methods to enable such high resolution for more detailed studies 
without increase in model complexity, or to reduce modelling time, 
represent the major research gap in the field of energy system transition 
research. 
Preferably such methods should be applicable to any existing model, 
as these concentrate on the better refining of the inputs in general rather 
than the model itself. Currently, most efforts are concentrated on the 
assessment of the impact of different time-series aggregations methods 
as discussed in Kotzur et al. [35] and the development of novel methods 
of temporal aggregation to increase the reliability of the time-series 
approach as researched in Hoffmann et al. [36]. Teichgraeber and 
Brandt [37] provide an overview of existing time-series aggregation 
methods. Other studies propose advanced methods of an optimal 
regional structure definition and spatial resolution reduction as 
described in Frysztacki et al. [38] to decrease models’ complexity. The 
computational time reduction can reach a factor of up to 50 for the 
times-series case [35], or even higher [37]. The impact of spatial reso-
lution reduction claimed to be significant while the value depends on the 
applied resolution [38,39] and it can be seen that higher spatial reso-
lution leads to better results. However, spatial resolution reduction 
naturally leads to significant deviations in the results of energy system 
optimisation with high shares of renewables [39]. Similarly, different 
methods of temporal aggregation lead to sensitive changes in the system 
optimisation results as can be seen in numerous studies [35,40]. For 
temporal aggregation Teichgraeber and Brandt [37] highlight different 
sources of errors, while the proper choice of the period represents the 
main challenge of time-series aggregation, proper linking and 
interaction of different time-series within the model has to be reached to 
allow credible results. The target is to find methods that allow a 
complexity reduction without change in simulation results and without 
modifications of the main model. 
This article presents a novel method to reduce the energy system 
transition modelling complexity without reduction of the results reli-
ability. This study introduces a novel hierarchical approach in multi- 
regional studies which is supposed to be applicable to any model with 
multi-nodal capabilities, thus filling this research gap. This novelty al-
lows substituting the simulation of an integrated multi-regional energy 
system by a simulation in a reduced regional resolution (macro-region 
level) followed by simulations in full regional and hourly resolution for 
each of the macro-regions in order to combine the reduced computa-
tional time of lower spatial resolution and the improved quality of re-
sults in high resolution. Despite the increased number of optimisation 
runs, the models on each level contain a smaller number of variables and 
are optimised faster, leading to reduced integrated simulation time for a 
given energy system. To the authors’ knowledge, such a method has not 
yet been discussed and examined for integrated energy system model-
ling. The main motivation behind this novel approach is to significantly 
reduce the model size at each simulation step and the overall simulation 
time without notable change in the transition pathway or structure of 
the modelled energy system, in order to allow energy system transition 
studies in higher regional resolution. 
2. Methods and data 
The proposed method is applied to the LUT-ESTM [8,22,23], which is 
designed to simulate energy transitions for integrated power, heat, 
transport, and industry sectors. For each time step, the model defines an 
optimal structure of an integrated energy system and operation modes of 
each system element to reach a least cost optimum of the entire energy 
system under given financial and technical assumptions as well as region 
or scenario specific conditions, which consider societal choices. The 
LUT-ESTM performs linear optimisation for the full energy system, or 
specific sectors, in an hourly resolution for each step of the transition, 
which increases the reliability of the results in comparison to annual 
energy demand balancing or time series-based approaches. For the given 
study, the LUT-ESTM used the Mosek optimiser (version 7) [41]. The 
LUT-ESTM allows for energy system simulation in high spatial resolu-
tion with individual regional energy systems interconnected with high 
voltage alternating current (HVAC) and high voltage direct current 
(HVDC) grids. The target of the optimisation is the minimisation of the 
total integrated energy system cost. The model describes the transition 
of power, heat, transport, and industry sectors and covers all energy 
demand and most anthropogenic GHG emissions. The model defines the 
optimal structure and operation of the integrated energy system to 
satisfy the given hourly demand of electricity, space heat, and domestic 
hot water demand, energy demand of the transport sector, and industrial 
demand (cement, steel, chemicals, aluminium, pulp and paper, desali-
nation, and other industries) at each step of the transition. This opti-
misation also considers the energy demand, available resources, and 
active capacities installed in previous steps. Costs of the system are 
calculated as the sum of the annualised capital and operational expen-
ditures, including ramping costs, fuel costs, and CO2 emissions pricing 
for all considered technologies. Energy system transitions are typically 
performed for the year 2020–2050 with 5-year time steps. At each step 
of the transition modelling, the existing active capacity for each tech-
nology defines the lower limit for the respective technology capacity. 
The active capacity existing in the system is defined at each time step for 
each region based on the data of the capacity installed at previous steps 
and the lifetime for a given technology at given commissioning years as 
presented in Eq. (1). 
D. Bogdanov et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Energy 273 (2023) 127213
3
∀t ∈ [tech] existingCapt,year =
∑
year
y=1960
newCapt,y •
((
y + Nt,y
)
> year
)
(1)  
wherein: y, year - years, t, tech - generation and storage technologies, 
existingCapt, year - existing active capacity for technology t at modelled 
year, newCapt,y - new built capacity for technology t at previous year y, 
Nt,y) - lifetime of the capacity of technology t built in year y. 
Then, the model optimisation determines the optimal regional ca-
pacity of the technologies in the given year, which defines the newly 
built capacity needed by the system as defined in Eq. (2). 
∀t ∈ [tech] newCapt,year = instCapt,year − existingCapt,year
(2)  
wherein: year - modelling year, t, tech - generation and storage tech-
nologies, newCapt, year - new built capacity for technology t at given year, 
instCap t,year - total capacity for technology t at given year as defined by 
the model optimisation, existingCapt, year - existing active capacity for 
technology t at modelled year. 
While the target function for the optimisation only considers the 
financial assumptions for the given year, the energy costs calculations in 
the post-processing phase consider the legacy of the capacity in-
stallations and the financial assumptions in the periods when these ca-
pacities were built. For the variable operational expenditures (opex) 
calculations, the energy output of technologies is split accordingly to the 
capacity age structure as defined in Eq. (3). 
wherein: year - modelling year, y - all years from 1960, t, tech - gener-
ation and storage technologies, EgenSplit,t,y - annual generation by tech-
nology t by capacity built at year y, newCapt,y - new built capacity for 
technology t built at year y, Egen,t,year - annual generation by technology t 
defined by the model for the modelling year, instCap t,year - total capacity 
for technology t at given year as defined by the model optimisation, Nt,y - 
lifetime of the capacity of technology t built at year y. 
The annualised cost of the system at the given year is calculated 
accordingly to Eq. (4).  
wherein: year - modelling year, y - all years from 1960, t, tech - gener-
ation and storage technologies, CAPEXr,t,y - capital expenditures for 
technology t in region r and year y, crfr,t,y - capital recovery factor for 
technology t in region r and year y, OPEXfixr,t,y - fixed operational ex-
penditures for technology t in region r and year y, OPEXvarr,t,y - variable 
operational expenditures technology t in region r and year y, newCapr,t,y - 
new built capacity for technology t built in region r at year y, Nt,y - 
lifetime of the capacity of technology t built at year y, EgenSplit,r,t,y - annual 
generation by technology t in region r in year by capacity built at year y, 
rampCostt - cost of ramping of technology t, totRampr,t - sum of power 
ramping values during the year for the technology t in the region r. 
This historical cost calculation approach considering the legacy 
system is also used for other cost calculations including levelised cost of 
electricity (LCOE) and split of LCOE in sub-categories. 
The model optimiser’s target function represents the minimisation of 
the annualised cost of the system (see Eq. (5)). The existing capacities 
represent the lower limit for the respective technologies capacity, thus 
the technologies capex on previous steps of transition has no impact on 
the system optimisation at the given step:  
wherein: year - modelling year, t, tech – electricity and heat generation, 
storage, power-to-X, tt, transm - electricity transmission technologies, 
CAPEXr,t,year - capital expenditures for technology t in region r and year, 
crfr,t,year - capital recovery factor for technology t in region r and year y, 
OPEXfixr,t,year - fixed operational expenditures for technology t in region 
r and year, OPEXvarr,t,year - variable operational expenditures technology 
t in region r and year, instCap t,year - total capacity for technology t at 
given year as defined by the model optimisation, Egen,r,t,year - annual 
generation by technology t in region r in year, rampCostt - cost of 
ramping of technology t, totRampr,t - sum of power ramping values 
during the year for the technology t in the region r, lengthl - length of line 
l in between regions. 
The capacities must be sufficient to satisfy the energy (electrify, heat, 
e-fuels and chemicals), transport services and industrial products de-
mand for every hour of the year as defined in balance equations for 
electricity, heat and other energy carriers for each hour of the year. 
Transmission grids between regions play especially important role in 
simulation of the energy systems with high shares of RE, allowing to 
access the best energy resources over the country. The transmission 
grids between the regions and related costs are fully covered in the 
model: the model defines the optimal capacity of HVAC and HVDC 
∀t ∈ [tech], ∀y ∈ [1960…year] EgenSplit,t,y = Egen,t,year •
(
newCapt,y •
((
y + Nt,y
)
> year
)) /
instCapt,year
(3)   
annualCostHistyear =
∑
reg
r=1
∑
tech
t=1
∑
year
y=1960
(
CAPEXr,t,y •crfr,t,y +OPEXfixr,t,y
)
•
((
newCapr,t,y •
((
y+Nt,y
)
>year
))
+OPEXvarr,t,y •EgenSplit,r,t,y +rampCostt •totRampr,t
(4)   
min
( ∑
reg
r=1
∑
tech
t=1
(
CAPEXr,t,year • crfr,t,year + OPEXfixr,t,year
)
• instCapt,year + OPEXvarr,t,year • Egen,r,t,year + rampCostt • totRampr,t
+
∑
lines
l=1
∑
transm
tt=1
(
CAPEXl,tt,year • crfl,tt,year + OPEXfixl,tt,year
)
• instCaptt,year • lengthl
)
(5)   
D. Bogdanov et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Energy 273 (2023) 127213
4
Fig. 1. Integrated energy system structure scheme and the model flowchart.  
D. Bogdanov et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Energy 273 (2023) 127213
5
power lines considering the length of the lines, the capacity of the AC/ 
DC converter pairs for HVDC lines, the losses in the power lines and 
converters. Distribution grid costs within the region are not included in 
the target function of the model, though the distribution losses are 
considered in the demand estimation. 
More details on LUT-ESTM are provided in the supplementary ma-
terial and the modelling approach is described in full in previous pub-
lications [22,23]. The model is based on the previous version presented 
in Bogdanov et al. [23]. The main modifications are the introduction of 
smart charging and vehicle-to-grid (V2G) function for battery-electric 
vehicles (BEV) and plug-in hybrid vehicles (PHEV). Additionally, the 
model considers the possibility of international e-fuels trading in terms 
of e-fuels imports. The simplified scheme of the integrated system in the 
LUT Energy System Transition Model is shown in Fig. 1. 
2.1. Hierarchical approach to the energy system modelling 
Modelling the entire energy system in hourly resolution with a 
technology-rich portfolio can be demanding, especially in multi-node 
simulations. The regional structure for a transition study with high 
shares of RE should be defined accurately to consider possible regional 
climate differences and in the right spatial resolution to avoid under-
estimating grid costs, averaging RE generation profiles, and thus 
underestimating the storage and flexible generation capacities. The 
regional structure should also match the regional division of the country 
to allow utilisation of the existing statistical data for inputs collection 
and facilitate the results analysis and comparison with actual data. At 
the same time, the number of sub-regions should not exceed a certain 
number to guarantee successful model simulation in an adequate 
amount of computation time. 
2.1.1. Hierarchical simulation sequence 
The proposed method combines simulations in lower and higher 
spatial resolution in order to integrate the reduced simulation time 
typical for the modelling in lower spatial resolution and high quality of 
results which can be acquired considering higher spatial resolution. The 
proposed hierarchical simulation sequence for the energy system 
modelling comprises four steps.  
1. The first step (full resolution definition) is the definition of the 
optimal spatial resolution and respective data preparation. The 
application on the case of Japan leads to statistical data collection at 
the prefecture level and partially for the nine electric power com-
panies (EPCOs) operating in mainland Japan, excluding the isolated 
Okinawa EPCO. Integrated energy system modelling in hourly res-
olution and a technology-rich portfolio would not be possible for the 
47 prefectures level, so the input data was structured for the nine 
EPCO areas that normally follow prefectures border; only Shizuoka is 
divided between Tokyo and Chubu EPCOs. Finally, the territory of 
mainland Japan is represented in 9 sub-regions: Hokkaido, Tohoku, 
Tokyo, Hokuriku, Chubu, Kansai, Chugoku, Shikoku, and Kyushu as 
described in Eq. (6). 
R1 ∪ R2 ∪ R3 ∪ R4 ∪ R5 ∪ R6 ∪ R7 ∪ R8 ∪ R9 ∈ J
(6)  
wherein: R1, R2… R9 represent individual EPCO areas and J – the whole 
mainland Japan.  
2. In the second step (aggregation to macro-regions and simulation), 
the spatial resolution is decreased to reduce the number of regions 
and the respective model complexity. The definition of these macro- 
regions must be aligned with the local conditions for balance of the 
regions and comparable resource conditions of the aggregated sub- 
regions. For the case of Japan, this leads to three macro-regions: 
Three northeast sub-regions (Hokkaido, Tohoku, and Tokyo EPCOs 
areas) were aggregated into one Northeast region, as the grid 
frequency in these sub-regions differs from the rest of the country, 
and all these sub-regions possess better than average wind resources. 
Three central sub-regions (Hokuriku, Chubu, and Kansai) are 
aggregated into the Centre macro-region. Kyushu, Chugoku, and 
Shikoku sub-regions are aggregated into the Southwest macro- 
region. Then, the energy system transition is modelled for the 
reduced regional structure consisting of only 3 macro-regions, as 
described in Eq. (7). The results of this simulation represent the 
pathway of the transition, and, for each time step of the transition, 
the results define the optimal energy system structure and power 
flows between the macro-regions as described in Eq. (8). Though the 
results of the simulation in the reduced spatial resolution suffer due 
to an underestimated variability of the RE resources and do not 
present detailed information on the RE installation distribution in-
side the macro-regions, the data on the power flows among the 
macro-regions provides insights on the energy exchange inside the 
country. 
McR1 ∪ McR2 ∪ McR3 ∈ J
(7)  
ELgenmc,h − ELdemmc,h − ELcurtmc,h =
∑
mcn
ELexpmc,mcn,h
•
(
1 − glmc,mcn
)
− ELimpmc,mcn,h •
(
1 − glmc,mcn
)
(8)  
wherein: McR1, McR2, McR3 represent macro-regions and J – the whole 
mainland Japan. mc – macro-region, mcn – neighbouring macro-region, 
h - hour of the year, ELgen – electricity generation, ELdem – electricity 
demand, ELcurt – electricity curtailment (excess), ELexp – electricity 
exports, ELimp – electricity imports, gl – grid losses.  
3. In the third step (separate macro-regions solutions) of the simulation 
sequence, each of the macro-regions is modelled in full regional 
resolution (Eqs. (9)–(11)). Each macro-region is modelled individu-
ally as an energy island, the power flows from the results of the 
simulation in reduced spatial resolution (second step) are added to 
the power balancing equations of the bordering sub-regions (Eq. 
(12)) to consider electricity exchange between macro-regions. If the 
macro-regions are interconnected via several sub-regions (i.e. 
Northeast and Central macro-regions are connected by the Tokyo- 
Chubu and Tohoku-Hokuriku lines), the energy flows from results 
of the second step are divided among these sub-regions accordingly 
to existing grid interconnection capacity, or equally if existing ca-
pacity is not sufficient and new grids have to be built. Finally, the 
energy flows between macro-regions are considered in the additional 
flows added to the sub-region’s electricity balance constraint as 
shown in Eq. (13). 
R1 ∪ R2 ∪ R3 ∈ McR1
(9)  
R4 ∪ R5 ∪ R6 ∈ McR2
(10)  
R7 ∪ R8 ∪ R9 ∈ McR3
(11)  
ELgenr,h − ELdemr,h − ELcurtr,h + ELaddr,h
=
∑
rn
ELexprn,t • glr,rn,t − ELimprn,t • glr,rn,t∀r, rn⊂McR
(12)  
∑
r
ELaddr,h =
∑
mcn
ELexpmcn,t • glmc,mcn,t − ELimpmcn,t • glmc,mcn,t
(13)  
wherein: R1, R2… R9 represent individual EPCO areas, McR1, McR2, 
McR3 represent macro-regions. r – sub-region, rn – neighbouring sub- 
region, McR – macro-region to which these region and neighbouring 
regions belong to, h - hour of the year, ELgen – electricity generation, 
ELdem – electricity demand, ELcurt – electricity curtailment (excess), 
ELadd – additional electricity flows representing the electricity flows 
D. Bogdanov et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Energy 273 (2023) 127213
6
between macro-regions, ELexp – electricity exports, ELimp – electricity 
imports, gl – grid efficiency, mc – macro-region to which region r – be-
longs to, mcn – neighbouring macro-region.  
4. In the fourth step (full resolution results), the results of each macro- 
region simulation in higher spatial resolution are tied back to 
represent the results of the fully integrated energy system of a 
country or region (see Eq. (14)). For the case of Japan, the results of 
all three macro-region simulations are merged, and regional energy 
system structures, operational results, grid structures, and operation 
inside macro-regions are directly taken from the results. The power 
flows between sub-regions at the macro-regions borders and 
respective grid capacities are calculated based on the simulation 
results in reduced spatial resolution (second step). Merged results 
fully reproduce the format of the results of the simulation in full 
regional resolution. The electricity flows for the reconstructed results 
in 9 sub-regions resolution are presented in Eq. (15). 
R1 ∪ R2 ∪ R3 ∪ R4 ∪ R5 ∪ R6 ∪ R7 ∪ R8 ∪ R9 ∈ J
(14)  
ELgenr,h − ELdemr,h − ELcurtr,h =
∑
ELexprn,t • glr,rn,t − ELimprn,t
• glr,rn,t∀r⊂J
(15)  
wherein: R1, R2… R9 represent individual EPCO areas and J – the whole 
mainland Japan, r – sub-region, rn – neighbouring sub-region, h - hour of 
the year, ELgen – electricity generation, ELdem – electricity demand, 
ELcurt – electricity curtailment (excess), ELexp – electricity exports, 
ELimp – electricity imports, gl – grid efficiency. 
A schematic representation of the hierarchical simulation sequence 
applied on the case of Japan is presented in Fig. 2. 
This approach can be used for simulation in even higher resolution, 
as the third step could be repeated to further increase the resolution and 
simulate each region in prefectures resolution for the case of Japan. Such 
a level of detail was not performed in this study as a level of nine sub- 
regions was considered sufficient, and verification via a classic simula-
tion in 47 prefectures resolution could not be performed due to too high 
complexity. The level of detail could be further increased by embedding 
Japan in an energy system transition for the whole Northeast Asia region 
[21,42], which would also enable modelling of coupled energy systems 
for the entire major region. In general, the hierarchical approach allows 
to model an energy system in high geographic detail as a sequence of 
two or more steps so that a highly complex simulation problem can be 
separated into a multi-level simulation task, for instance in a five level 
approach on the case of Japan: Northeast Asia as a global major region 
(first level), Japan as a country in Northeast Asia (second level), the 
three macro-regions of Japan (third level), then nine sub-regions of 
Japan (fourth level), the 47 prefectures of Japan (fifth level). That 
principle can be applied to all regions in the world and independently of 
the used energy system model and that would allow to model the world 
in thousands of regions [7]. 
2.1.2. Variable renewable energy profiles for hierarchical simulations 
The RE profiles for individual sub-regions are calculated based on 
weather data for the year 2005 taken from NASA [43,44] and repro-
duced to a higher resolution by the German Aerospace Centre [45]. The 
regional profiles calculation routine is described in Ref. [21]. In this 
routine, the locations with higher full load hour (FLh) values are given 
higher weights in the regional profiles calculations to reflect the reality 
that RE projects are developed first in locations with attractive resource 
Fig. 2. Schematic representation of the hierarchical simulation sequence for the case of Japan.  
D. Bogdanov et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Energy 273 (2023) 127213
7
conditions. 
Applied to macro-regions, this routine can lead to an increased in-
accuracy in the RE profiles estimation. The RE potential can be both 
overestimated if the overall macro-region profile is strongly influenced 
by the RE conditions in the best locations, even if these locations are 
distant from the main demand centres, or underestimated, if the better 
than average locations are concentrated in part of one of the sub-regions 
and these locations’ potential is averaged with the potential of locations 
in other sub-regions. Consequently, in the first case, the real cost of RE 
generation would be underestimated by neglecting additional trans-
mission grid costs, and in the second case, the average FLh value in the 
macro-region would be too low, making the RE generation less 
economically attractive. In any case, the hourly capacity factor profiles 
averaged over bigger areas will be smoothened and lead to an under-
estimation of short-term storage in the system. 
The impact of the RE resource aggregation effect can be reduced if 
the RE profiles for macro-regions are calculated as the average or 
weighted average of sub-regional RE profiles. The same challenge is still 
present on the sub-regional level because distribution grid costs are not 
considered, though the order of a potential error may be reduced. In the 
case of the weighted average approach, the weights of the individual 
sub-regions in the total average profile for the macro-region are esti-
mated based on the regional energy system parameters, such as annual 
power demand, peak load, the average length of grid connection to 
neighbouring sub-regions’ demand centres, RE technologies LCOE in 
each of the sub-regions, and average LCOE value for the whole macro- 
region (as if all sub-regions were weighted evenly). Formulas for the 
weights are presented in the supplementary material (‘Macro-regions 
data preparation’). Though such a simplified approach obviously cannot 
estimate the real distribution of the RE capacities inside macro-regions, 
it is able to capture the main aspects of the distribution: more capacity 
will be installed in the region with much better RE resources than other 
sub-regions and it will be located closer to main demand centres. 
Conversely, in the case of evenly distributed resources and long dis-
tances between regional demand centres, the capacity will be distrib-
uted more evenly. For the proposed regional structure of Japan, the 
average and weighted average approaches resulted in very similar 
numbers, and, considering that the weights formula that was used is the 
result of approximation of global numbers, the simple average formula 
with equal weights was applied. Table 1 presents the results of the RE 
profiles calculations for three main cases.  
1. RE profiles calculated for 9 sub-regions as described in Ref. [21].  
2. RE profiles calculated for 3 macro-region as described in Ref. [21].  
3. RE profile for macro-region calculation as an average of regional 
profiles. 
Calculation of the profiles for macro-regions based on regional pro-
files allows for a significant reduction in the cooper plate effect and 
avoids unrealistically high estimation of RE technologies’ FLh for macro- 
regions. 
2.2. Applied scenario variations 
The energy system transition is simulated considering the ambitious 
Best Policy Scenario (BPS) with a fast introduction of RE generation 
technologies in power generation and fast electrification of heat and 
transport sectors. The BPS definition is the same as used in Ref. [46] and 
Bogdanov et al. [47], who analysed this scenario in comparison with 
other less ambitious pathways. The BPS aims to reach the governmental 
target for 2030 and zero CO2 emissions from the energy sector by 2050. 
At least 35 GW of solar photovoltaics (PV) must be installed in the years 
2020–2025, and, by 2030, the share of RE in electricity generation must 
reach 40%, wherein the coal and nuclear power plants are assumed to be 
phased out by 2030. No additional nuclear reactors are restarted, and no 
new coal, oil, or nuclear power plants are commissioned. Coal use in 
industrial heat and processes is allowed until a full fossil ban in 2050. 
Commissioning of new gas-fired power plants is allowed; however, in 
later steps of the transition, these power plants switch to using sus-
tainable e-methane and bio-methane. 
In the transport and heat sectors, the BPS assumes rapid electrifica-
tion: fast growth of electrical space and water heating shares in resi-
dential and commercial sectors, and fast reduction of internal 
combustion engine (ICE) vehicles shares in road transportation. By 
2050, the share of battery-electric vehicles (BEV) in passenger trans-
portation is assumed to exceed 76%, while the share of ICE and plug-in 
hybrid electric vehicles (PHEV) drops to about 13%. In freight trans-
portation, the BEV share in 2050 is assumed to reach 67%, while ICE and 
PHEV still play a significant role with 26% of all freight transportation. 
Shares of hydrogen powered fuel cell electric vehicles (FCEV) are 
assumed to reach around 10% in passenger and 6% in freight road 
transportation. Rail transport is assumed to be fully electrified, whereas 
for marine and aviation transport, a conservative assumption of zero 
direct electrification is considered. To enable a gradual introduction of 
green fuels in the transport segments, the scenario sets minimum shares 
of green fuels consumption: at least 43% of liquid fuels in 2040 and 76% 
in 2045. Sustainable biofuels and locally produced and imported 
Fischer-Tropsch fuels are considered as such green fuels. Defossilisation 
of the energy system is supported by the growth of the carbon pricing 
from 2.4 €/tCO2 in 2020 to 150 €/tCO2 in 2050. 
The financial and technical assumptions for the scenario, RE poten-
tial and energy demand assumptions for the scenario and respective 
references to the sources are presented in the supplementary material 
(Tables S1-S25) for each of the transition steps. The weighted average 
cost of capital (WACC) is set to 7% for all technologies. 
This scenario is simulated using three different versions of the model. 
Table 1 
The solar PV and wind turbines full load hours.  
Technology 
Macro-region 
Northeast 
Centre 
Southwest 
Standard RE profiles calculation routine for 9 sub-regions 
PV 
1264 
1256 
1382 
1232 
1373 
1334 
1345 
1342 
1393 
Onshore wind 
3272 
3094 
2254 
3004 
2318 
2998 
3175 
1561 
3144 
Offshore wind 
4737 
4413 
4976 
4343 
4663 
4323 
3980 
4340 
4514 
Standard RE profiles calculation routine for 3 macro-regions 
PV 
1313 
1357 
1380 
Onshore wind 
3030 
2749 
2930 
Offshore wind 
4515 
4325 
4153 
Average of regional profiles with deviation to standard RE profiles 
PV 
1300 (−1.0%) 
1313 (−3.2%) 
1360 (−1.4%) 
Onshore wind 
2873 (−5.2%%) 
2773 (+0.9%) 
2627 (−10.3%) 
Offshore wind 
4709 (+4.3%) 
4443 (+2.7%) 
4278 (+3.0%)  
D. Bogdanov et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Energy 273 (2023) 127213
8
1. 9Reg: Standard approach with nine interconnected sub-regions 
simulation. 
2. 3Mc_A: Hierarchical approach with macro-regions profiles calcu-
lated as an average of regional profiles 
3. 3Mc_St: Hierarchical approach with macro-regions profiles calcu-
lated based on data in 0.45◦ × 0.45◦ resolution applying the profiles 
integration per entire macro-region. 
Outputs of the standard and hierarchical simulations have an iden-
tical format and are processed using the same scripts to calculate the 
system cost and other results. 
3. Results 
The application of the hierarchical approach to the Japanese energy 
Fig. 3. Power capacity (top) and electricity generation (bottom) through the transition for the full 9 sub-regions simulation, 9Reg (left), hierarchical simulation with 
macro-regions RE profiles calculated as average of regional profiles, 3Mc_A (centre), and hierarchical approach with macro-regions RE profiles calculated based on 
profiles of individual nodes, 3Mc_St (right). 
Fig. 4. Regional structure of power generation capacity in 2050 for the full nine sub-regions simulation (left), hierarchical simulation with macro-regions RE profiles 
calculated as average of regional profiles (centre), and hierarchical approach with macro-regions RE profiles calculated based on profiles of individual nodes (right). 
D. Bogdanov et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Energy 273 (2023) 127213
9
system transition modelling does not result in a significant change in the 
results. The transition modelling in 9 regions resolution or applying the 
hierarchical approach results in a structural change of the energy system 
of Japan, from a mostly fossil fuels-based energy system to a 100% RE- 
based system in 2050. However, in all cases, the transition follows the 
same pathway; for each step of the transition, the energy system struc-
ture and costs are similar independently of the applied modelling 
approach. 
Fig. 3 presents the structure of power capacity and generation 
through the transition for the standard approach (9Reg) and the com-
parison with the results using the hierarchical approach with macro- 
regions RE profiles calculated as an average of regional profiles 
(3Mc_A) and the hierarchical approach with macro-regions RE profiles 
calculated based on profiles of individual nodes (3Mc_St). The results for 
these three modelling designs are almost identical, in case of hierar-
chical simulations the total power generation capacity is 11 GW (1.2%) 
higher, mostly due to 1.2–1.6% higher wind capacity in the case of 
simulations based on a hierarchical approach. Correspondingly, wind 
generation is slightly higher in the case of the hierarchical simulation. 
Results in 3 macro-regions resolution (the second step of the hierarchical 
simulation) have shown higher deviations, the total power generation 
capacity is 20–32 GW (2.2–3.5%) higher compared to results of the 
standard modelling in 9 regions resolution, in particular due to wind 
power capacity that is 6.1–6.6% higher, as it is expected for the results in 
lower special resolution. Higher deviations are seen for the case of ca-
pacity factors of macro-regions calculated as an average of the 3 sub- 
regions’ capacity factors. The capacity and generation of the solar PV 
capacities do not change. Across scenarios, all available PV potential is 
utilised by the end of the transition as PV is the least cost source of 
electricity in 2050. 
Though the role of wind generation increases in the case of the hi-
erarchical approach, it affects the onshore and offshore wind generation 
differently: the capacity of offshore wind increases while the total ca-
pacity of onshore wind decreases. Likewise, the regional distribution of 
the generation capacities changes. In the case of the hierarchical 
approach simulation, the system tends to increase power generation 
capacities in northeastern sub-regions with high wind potential: Hok-
kaido and Tohoku, while reducing the capacity of the local onshore and 
offshore wind generation in southwestern sub-regions where wind tur-
bines FLh are significantly lower. Fig. 4 presents the generation capac-
ities structure in the sub-regions of Japan for the three scenarios. 
At the second step of the hierarchical simulations, the system un-
derestimates the cost of the electricity transmission inside the region. 
Annualised cost of the transmission grid in 2050 (including annualised 
capital costs and grid losses of the transmission grids between regions) 
on macro-regions step is 4–4.8 b€, while in full regional resolution the 
annualised cost of grids in 2050 is 11 b€. That has a significant impact 
for Japan due to the excellent wind generation potential in the distant 
Fig. 5. Regional structure of power generation and power flows through the grids in 2050 for the full nine sub-regions simulation (left), hierarchical simulation with 
macro-regions RE profiles calculated as average of regional profiles (centre), and hierarchical approach with macro-regions RE profiles calculated based on profiles of 
individual nodes (right). 
D. Bogdanov et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Energy 273 (2023) 127213
10
region of Hokkaido. Considering the low cost of electricity production 
and underestimated cost of the grid connection from Hokkaido to the 
Tokyo region and further to the south, hierarchical simulation results in 
higher electricity transmission from north to south than the full nine 
sub-regions simulation case, as induced in the second step of the simu-
lation and thus as inherited power flows between macro-regions at the 
third step of the hierarchical simulation. In the final result of the hier-
archical simulation, the annualised cost of grids in 2050 reaches 
11.1–11.9 b€, slightly higher than for the full 9 sub-regions simulation. 
Fig. 5 shows the electricity generation and power flows through the 
grids in three simulation cases. 
It is important to mention that most of grid investments occur in 
2045–2050 when the local RE resources in Central and Southwestern 
regions are mostly exploited while the fossil energy supply is reduced to 
zero. While the system simulated with a hierarchical approach tends to 
rely more on electricity imports from the northeast sub-regions of 
Hokkaido and Tohoku, the role of storage in electricity supply decreases. 
At the same time, electricity curtailment increases, especially in the 
northeast sub-regions. The electricity supply from northeast sub-regions 
does not simply cover the RE potential deficit in southern and central 
sub-regions, rather, it contributes to energy supply balancing to 
compensate for local RE supply variability. Additionally, the system 
tends to use more gas storage in the form of hydrogen and methane. The 
heat systems of all sub-regions are not interconnected; thus, a different 
simulation approach has no direct impact on the heating system, only 
indirect due to changes in the electricity generation profiles and LCOE in 
the sub-regions. Fig. 6 displays the heat capacity and generation struc-
ture by sources for the three simulation cases. 
In the cases of the hierarchical approach the installed capacity is 
slightly higher at 2–18 GW, with biggest deviations in the 3Mc_St case, 
Fig. 6. Heat capacity (top) and generation (bottom) through the transition for the full 9 sub-regions simulation, 9Reg (left), hierarchical simulation with macro- 
regions RE profiles calculated as average of regional profiles, 3Mc_A (centre), and hierarchical approach with macro-regions RE profiles calculated based on pro-
files of individual nodes, 3Mc_St (right). 
Table 2 
Energy carriers and system cost for the transition scenarios calculated by the three different modelling designs.   
Unit 
Scenario 
2020 
2025 
2030 
2035 
2040 
2045 
2050 
LCOE 
[€/MWhel] 
9Reg 
106.9 
110.5 
119.4 
108 
88.1 
77.9 
68.2 
3Mc_A 
106.9 
110.6 
122.3 
112.3 
89.7 
78.9 
68.4 
3Mc_St 
106.9 
112.1 
123 
112.8 
90.4 
79.6 
69.4 
LCOH 
[€/MWhth] 
9Reg 
33.6 
38.8 
40.9 
40.5 
42.1 
49.2 
61.9 
3Mc_A 
33.6 
38.8 
41.2 
40.3 
42.3 
49.6 
60.9 
3Mc_St 
33.6 
39.2 
41.5 
40.9 
42.9 
50.2 
62.5 
LCOEn 
[€/MWh] 
9Reg 
51.3 
56.8 
63.3 
61.9 
59.7 
62.1 
64.8 
3Mc_A 
51.3 
56.8 
64.1 
63 
60.5 
62.8 
65.3 
3Mc_St 
51.3 
57.6 
64.5 
63.7 
61.4 
63.7 
66.3 
Total ann. Cost 
[b€] 
9Reg 
206 
214 
216 
191 
172 
170 
167 
3Mc_A 
206 
214 
219 
194 
175 
172 
168 
3Mc_St 
206 
217 
220 
196 
177 
174 
171  
D. Bogdanov et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Energy 273 (2023) 127213
11
mostly due to gas and biomass-based district heating and CHP capac-
ities, however, the share of these technologies in heat supply is minor, 
and these technologies are mostly used for peak shaving while the heat 
supply structure does not really change in the three cases, with total 
generation deviations within 1%. The results in the three macro-regions 
resolution (the second step of the hierarchical simulation) show a 
similar deviation on the level of 4–20 GW. Surprisingly the higher de-
viation is shown for the 3Mc_A case, the heat generation structure is 
similar to the one for the nine regions simulations with less than 2% 
difference in total generation. The transport sector energy demand is 
predefined by the scenario assumptions and does not change for the 
studied cases. While some deviations can be noticed, the overall system 
structure is still very similar, which consequently leads to similar system 
costs and cost of energy. Table 2 presents the results for the LCOE, 
levelised cost of heat (LCOH), levelised cost of energy (LCOEn), and total 
system cost. 
While the impact of the different approaches can appear negligible 
for the long-term transition studies, the impact on the computation 
speed is much more significant. The hierarchical modelling approach 
shows robustness towards the systems’ overall structure as the differ-
ence in individual technology capacity or energy costs remain within a 
±3% range. At the same time, the hierarchical approach leads to a sig-
nificant reduction of the model size in terms of the number of variables 
and, consequently, the time of the system optimisation. Table 3 shows 
the number of variables and optimisation time for the hierarchical and 
standard approach cases. 
The optimisation time depends not only on the model structure, 
number of variables and constraints, and solver parameters, it is also 
dependent on the data inputs for the model. Despite the same model 
structure, solver parameters, and hardware used for both hierarchical 
simulation cases, the RE technologies capacity factors were different, 
leading to significant variations in optimisation times. Additionally, 
other processes could also compete for the computational resources of 
the user workstation and lead to considerable deviation in computa-
tional time. As a result, the computational time reduction for the hier-
archical simulation case varies from 2.35 times in the case of the 3Mc_St 
scenario to 3.3 times in the case of the 3Mc_A scenario compared to the 
full computational time in full nine sub-regions simulation case. 
4. Discussion 
The results of the simulations show that the hierarchical approach 
for the simulation can lead to a significant reduction in computational 
time. The hierarchical approach with three macro-regions comprising 
three sub-regions each reduces the number variables and constraints on 
each of the simulation steps by a factor of 3 compared to the standard 
case where the nine sub-regions of Japan are simulated. The reduction of 
variables and constraints then leads to a reduction of the model size by a 
factor of 3 for each of the hierarchical simulation steps. That enables the 
simulation of more complex energy system models, with more 
comprehensive technological portfolios, more sectors considered and 
more sector coupling technologies, and higher temporal and spatial 
resolution. 
The impact on the optimisation time is lower than the impact on the 
model size, the reduction of the total optimisation time is in the range of 
factors of 2.35–3.3, depending on the scenario, which represents a 
substantial reduction. The time-series approach or spatial resolution 
reduction methods allow for more significant decreases in computa-
tional time. For the simulation with nine sub-regions regional structure, 
the reduction of computational time exceeds the additional time for data 
preparation for the macro-regions level, though exact time spent on data 
preparation cannot be defined by authors. The benefits increase, espe-
cially for research projects where multiple energy transition scenarios 
aiming for different policy targets are to be studied, initial assumptions 
are not perfectly defined and changing scenario definitions have to be 
considered, sensitivity analyses are carried out, etc. Another benefit is 
improved robustness to hardware and software failure. In the event of a 
potential workstation restart, the time loss is limited to the time 
consumed for a certain step of the hierarchical simulation, since the 
results of the previous step are already saved. Overall, the hierarchical 
approach has proven itself as an effective way to save time for energy 
system modelling. 
The impact on the system structure can be noticed, but it is not 
significant. The variation of different technology shares in 2050 remains 
within ±1.5%, and the variation is higher in the 2030s. There, the 9Reg 
scenario leads to significantly faster defossilisation and higher reliance 
on onshore wind installations compared to the hierarchical simulation 
case. Later in the 2040s, the deviations in system structure reduce. 
The main reason of deviations is the impact of lower spatial resolu-
tion on the RE potential estimation for the macro-regions step. At that 
step the deviation of the results is highest and then reduces at the third 
step of the hierarchical simulation, when each macro-region is modelled 
in higher spatial resolution. Still some deviations are inherited due to the 
use of power flows in grids adopted from the macro-regions level. One 
can see that the highest deviations are seen for the power sector, that 
relies on VRE electricity generation and is directly affected by power 
grid use, while the impact on the heat sector is smoothened as it con-
sumes the electricity mix from the power sector. Overall, the hierar-
chical approach leads to a higher role of imported low-cost electricity 
and a lower role of local higher cost electricity, but for the case of Japan 
the impact is minor. 
The impact on the system cost and the levelised cost of energy is not 
significant; in 2050, the costs are within ±2.5%, and even in the 2030s, 
the cost deviations do not exceed ±3%. The 3Mc_St results show the 
largest deviations compared to the nine sub-regions simulations, while 
the difference between the results of 3Mc_A and results of simulation for 
the nine sub-regions is much smaller and is within ±1% in 2050 and 
does not exceed ±2% through the transition. 
These deviations are less than the deviations observed in case of 
applying the different time-series methods as shown by Kotzur et al. 
[35]. For some specific system configurations like CHP reliant or the 
residential system, authors found ‘prediction errors less than 2%.’ While 
the system cost stays roughly the same, one can see that the system 
structure in Kotzur et al. [35] changes significantly. Similarly, the 
regional resolution reduction also leads to significant deviations in the 
results [39]. The proposed hierarchical approach allows for the avoid-
ance of these effects. Even though the deviations in the energy system 
structure after the first step of the hierarchical simulation are much 
higher, the second level simulation for individual macro-regions 
comprising the three sub-regions leads to improved results. 
The range of deviations induced by the cost assumptions uncertainty 
can be much higher; as an extreme case, one can compare the fossil fuels 
Table 3 
Number of variables and optimisation time of the model for the three different modelling designs. The optimisation time comprises seven myopic steps each covering 
the 8760 h of a year modelled in perfect foresight.   
Variables 
Constraints 
Optimisation time [sec] 
Macro 
Regional 
Macro 
Regional 
Macro 
Regional 
Total 
9Reg  
30,494,288  
42,013,836   
671,823 
3Mc_A 
10,082,998 
10,118,040 
13,823,567 
13,911,156 
59,232 
145,336 
204,568 
3Mc_St 
10,082,998 
10,118,040 
13,823,567 
13,911,156 
107,082 
177,933 
285,015  
D. Bogdanov et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Energy 273 (2023) 127213
12
costs assumed by the International Energy Agency and other institutions 
for the period 2020 to 2025, and the fossil fuels prices in autumn 2021 to 
winter 2022. The capital costs are far less volatile, but the uncertainty of 
the technologies’ capital and operational cost projections in 30 years’ 
time horizon exceeds the uncertainty induced by the hierarchical sim-
ulations approach. 
The hierarchical approach provides the possibility to significantly 
reduce the energy system simulation time without relevant changes to 
the simulation results. The core assumption of this method is that the 
power flows among macro-regions properly estimate the power flows 
among sub-regions in the full resolution case. In practice, though, the 
model tends to overestimate the grids utilisation as the cost of electricity 
transmission within the region remains unknown. That is the key reason 
for deviations between the scenarios, i.e. the higher share of onshore 
wind in the 2030s is the result of free access to the wind potential on 
Hokkaido island. Furthermore, an overall higher reliance on imports 
from northwestern sub-regions is a result of an underestimation of the 
grid costs from Hokkaido island, which makes these imports lower in 
cost than local production in central and southeastern sub-regions of 
Japan. 
As power grid utilisation plays such an important role in hierarchical 
simulation, the proper definition of the macro-regions structure be-
comes very important. It should consider the existing grid structure, so 
that existing high-capacity lines connect the macro-regions; at the same 
time, sub-regions inside the macro-regions must share the borders, and 
the distance between these sub-regions’ demand centres must be mini-
mal in order to minimise underestimation of grid costs. Consequently, 
combining island sub-regions should be avoided as sea-connections are 
more expensive. Unfortunately, the macro-regions had to comprise 
several islands considering the overall structure of Japan; thus, the costs 
of exports from Hokkaido, as well as the cost of imports to Shikoku and 
Kyushu, were underestimated, which led to deviations in the hierar-
chical approach. 
Although the import and export costs between regions were under-
estimated, the deviations between the simulation results were restricted 
by the limited RE potential of Japan. Considering the limited RE po-
tential, the high energy demand, and PV CAPEX, the system had to 
utilise all available PV potential in all scenarios as PV was a lowest cost 
energy source with limited availability. Thus, the number of options for 
the system was limited and the remaining energy demand had to be 
covered with onshore or offshore wind power, either with local gener-
ation, or via imports from other sub-regions. In sub-regions with a 
higher PV capacity potential, the system would have more options to 
balance energy demand and supply, which could also lead to higher 
deviations in the results. Though in practice, this effect would be limited 
as the solar irradiation and therefore the PV yield potential is less site 
specific than the wind yield potential. For Japan, the PV yield difference 
between sub-regions of Japan is much lower than the one of wind power, 
thus higher PV potential assumptions could lead to even lower de-
viations in the results. 
The wind power capacity potential is also almost fully used in all the 
regions, however, there one can see a substantial difference in results of 
the standard 9-regions simulation and the hierarchical simulations re-
sults: in the hierarchical cases the system tends not to use the local high 
cost wind generation in the Shikoku region, while in case of the standard 
9-regions simulation the system reaches the upper limit of onshore wind 
power capacity in all regions. 
Another limitation of the proposed algorithm is an arbitrary alloca-
tion of multiple grid connections between macro-regions, for example an 
additional power line between the Northeast macro-region and Central 
macro-region can be built to connect Tohoku to Hokuriku region, or 
Tokyo to Chubu. Currently the algorithm splits the capacity and power 
flows equally, but, as it can be seen in Fig. 5, in the standard 9-regions 
simulation case, the Tokyo to Chubu connection plays a far more 
important role. 
The results of the simulation are also affected by the RE technologies 
FLh profiles computation approach. The results show that for the case of 
this study, the method based on the calculation of an average for indi-
vidual profiles of sub-regions included in the macro-region (3Mc_A) 
performed slightly better than the method based on the FLh profiles 
computation for the whole macro-region (3Mc_St). The results of the 
3Mc_A scenario calculations were closer to the results of the standard 
nine sub-regions simulation; at the same time, the simulation time was 
about 40% higher compared to the 3Mc_St simulation. It is not clear how 
the outcome will change in the case of other regions’ studies, but at least 
for the case of Japan, the FLh calculation approach is not a decisive 
parameter since the results of the system simulations were very close 
regardless of the chosen FLh calculations approach, and the hierarchical 
approach provides a significant gain in simulation speed. 
For accurate macro-regions structure definition, the same approach 
can be applied to other regions of the world and on a global level. If a 
hierarchical approach was applied to a global simulation, the first level 
results on a major region level simulation (like Europe, Eurasia, 
Northeast Asia, etc.) will be naturally strongly affected by the copper 
plate effect. However, going further to macro-regions and sub-regions 
levels simulations will reduce the deviations introduced by the under-
estimation of energy transportation costs. Additional levels of simula-
tion can be applied to improve the spatial resolution and further 
improve the accuracy of the results via reduction of the cooper plate 
effect. An example for a 4-level approach would be major regions in the 
world (level 1), macro-regions in Europe (level 2), Finland as a country 
in a Nordic macro-region (level 3) and Southeast Finland as a local re-
gion in Finland (level 4). 
5. Conclusions 
The results show that the hierarchical simulation approach can be 
applied to energy system transition studies. It results in a significant 
reduction of the model size and optimisation time, without a significant 
change in the simulation results compared to the simulation in full sub- 
regions resolution. The simulation on the chosen case of Japan struc-
tured the nine sub-regions via two steps of simulations, one for three 
macro-regions and the other for individual macro-regions comprising 
three sub-regions each. This led to reductions in computation time by 
factors of 2.35–3.3 compared to the standard simulation in nine sub- 
regions resolution. Such computational time reductions are driven by 
the decrease of model size on each step, which leads to a model that is 3 
times smaller than standard simulation conditions. While the optimi-
sation time decrease is significant, the structure of the resulting energy 
system and the cost of the energy stays within a ±2.5% range for the 
target year 2050. While the reductions in computation time should be on 
the same level for all regions whenever a similar macro-regions structure 
is applied, the impact of the hierarchical simulation approach on the 
results has to be further studied for other regions. 
The hierarchical approach demands an accurate definition of the 
macro-regions structure on each hierarchical simulation step to mini-
mise the impact of the grid costs and the FLh difference between sub- 
regions within the region in order to limit the cooper plate effect. The 
length of the grid connections within the macro-region should be at a 
minimum to minimise the impact of underestimated costs of the grid and 
losses in the grid. At the same time, sub-regions within the macro-region 
should have a comparable RE potential both in terms of installed ca-
pacity potential and FLh. 
In energy transition studies, another question is how to calculate the 
macro-region’s RE capacity factors profiles in order to further limit the 
copper plate effect. In the case of Japan, the two tested approaches of 
either averaging the more detailed sub-regions profiles or applying the 
profiles generation method to the entire macro-region as a whole 
demonstrate a similar performance. While one approach leads to closer 
simulation results, another allows for a more substantial reduction of the 
simulation time, but both are applicable in the case of Japan. 
The hierarchical simulation approach can enable an increase in the 
D. Bogdanov et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Energy 273 (2023) 127213
13
number of scenarios studied for each project given the same amount of 
time and computational resources. Otherwise, the approach can be used 
to facilitate studies with a higher temporal, spatial, or technological 
resolution, which could not be optimised with a standard full resolution 
approach considering computational limits. In the investigated case, the 
method was applied on two levels. First, one simulation on macro- 
regions level, and a second carrying out three parallel simulations for 
individual macro-regions comprising three sub-regions each, where 
each sub-region represents one of the nine mainland electric power 
companies’ areas. In the case of Japan, a third level could be introduced 
to simulate in detail each of these electric power companies’ areas in the 
prefecture’s resolution. 
More levels can be introduced, and this method can be applied to 
study global energy systems in high spatial resolution of 500–600 sub- 
regions or higher. There, each of these 500 to 600 sub-regions can be 
simulated not as energy islands, but with interregional energy flows a 
part of a global interconnected energy system. 
Credit author statement 
Dmitrii Bogdanov: Conceptualisation, Methodology, Investigation, 
Resources, Writing – Original Draft, Writing – Review & Editing, Visu-
alisation.; Ayobami Solomon Oyewo: Resources, Writing – Review & 
Editing.; Christian Breyer: Conceptualisation, Methodology, Writing – 
Review & Editing, Supervision. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Data availability 
No data was used for the research described in the article. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the general support of LUT 
University. The authors would like to thank Gabriel Lopez for 
proofreading. 
Appendix A. Supplementary data 
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.energy.2023.127213. 
References 
[1] [IPCC] - International Panel on Climate Change. Climate change 2022: mitigation 
of climate change. Contribution of working group III to the sixth assessment report 
of the intergovernmental panel on climate change. 2022. https://doi.org/10.1017/ 
9781009157926. Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA. 
[2] [IPCC] - International Panel on Climate Change. Climate change 2014: mitigation 
of climate change. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press; 2014. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107415416. 
[3] [IRENA] - International Renewable Energy Agency. Renewable power generation 
costs in 2021. 2022. Abu Dhabi. 
[4] Lazard. Lazard’s levelised cost of energy analysis (version 15.0). 2021. New York. 
[5] Brown T, Schlachtberger D, Kies A, Schramm S, Greiner M. Synergies of sector 
coupling and transmission reinforcement in a cost-optimised, highly renewable 
European energy system. Energy 2018;160:720–39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
energy.2018.06.222. 
[6] Connolly D, Lund H, Mathiesen BV. Smart Energy Europe: the technical and 
economic impact of one potential 100% renewable energy scenario for the 
European Union. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2016;60:1634–53. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.rser.2016.02.025. 
[7] Breyer C, Khalili S, Bogdanov D, Ram M, Oyewo AS, Aghahosseini A, et al. On the 
history and future of 100% renewable energy systems research. IEEE Access 2022; 
10:78176–218. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3193402. 
[8] Bogdanov D, Ram M, Aghahosseini A, Gulagi A, Oyewo AS, Child M, et al. Low-cost 
renewable electricity as the key driver of the global energy transition towards 
sustainability. Energy 2021;227:120467. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
energy.2021.120467. 
[9] Eyre N. From using heat to using work: reconceptualising the zero carbon energy 
transition. Energy Effic 2021;14. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12053-021-09982-9. 
[10] Prina MG, Manzolini G, Moser D, Nastasi B, Sparber W. Classification and 
challenges of bottom-up energy system models - a review. Renew Sustain Energy 
Rev 2020. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2020.109917. 
[11] Kittel M, Schill W-P. Renewable energy targets and unintended storage cycling: 
implications for energy modeling. iScience 2022;25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
isci.2022.104002. 
[12] Brown T, Bischof-Niemz T, Blok K, Breyer C, Lund H, Mathiesen BV. Response to 
‘Burden of proof: a comprehensive review of the feasibility of 100% renewable- 
electricity systems. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2018;92:834–47. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.rser.2018.04.113. 
[13] Connolly D, Lund H, Mathiesen BV, Leahy M. A review of computer tools for 
analysing the integration of renewable energy into various energy systems. Appl 
Energy 2010;87:1059–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2009.09.026. 
[14] Heide D, Greiner M, von Bremen L, Hoffmann C. Reduced storage and balancing 
needs in a fully renewable European power system with excess wind and solar 
power generation. Renew Energy 2011;36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
renene.2011.02.009. 
[15] Rodríguez RA, Becker S, Andresen GB, Heide D, Greiner M. Transmission needs 
across a fully renewable European power system. Renew Energy 2014;63. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2013.10.005. 
[16] Breyer C, Bogdanov D, Aghahosseini A, Gulagi A, Fasihi M. On the techno- 
economic benefits of a global energy interconnection. Econ Energy Environ Policy 
2020;9:83–102. https://doi.org/10.5547/2160-5890.9.1.cbre. 
[17] Galv´an A, Haas J, Moreno-Leiva S, Osorio-Aravena JC, Nowak W, Palma-Benke R, 
et al. Exporting sunshine: planning South America’s electricity transition with 
green hydrogen. Appl Energy 2022;325:119569. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apenergy.2022.119569. 
[18] Lopez G, Aghahosseini A, Child M, Khalili S, Fasihi M, Bogdanov D, et al. Impacts 
of model structure, framework, and flexibility on perspectives of 100% renewable 
energy transition decision-making. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2022;164:112452. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2022.112452. 
[19] Østergaard PA. Reviewing EnergyPLAN simulations and performance indicator 
applications in EnergyPLAN simulations. Appl Energy 2015;154:921–33. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2015.05.086. 
[20] Lund H, Thellufsen JZ, Østergaard PA, Sorknæs P, Skov IR, Mathiesen BV. 
EnergyPLAN – advanced analysis of smart energy systems. Smart Energy 2021;1: 
100007. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SEGY.2021.100007. 
[21] Bogdanov D, Breyer C. North-East Asian Super Grid for 100% renewable energy 
supply: optimal mix of energy technologies for electricity, gas and heat supply 
options. Energy Convers Manag 2016;112:176–90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enconman.2016.01.019. 
[22] Bogdanov D, Farfan J, Sadovskaia K, Aghahosseini A, Child M, Gulagi A, et al. 
Radical transformation pathway towards sustainable electricity via evolutionary 
steps. Nat Commun 2019;10:1077. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-08855-1. 
[23] Bogdanov D, Gulagi A, Fasihi M, Breyer C. Full energy sector transition towards 
100% renewable energy supply: integrating power, heat, transport and industry 
sectors including desalination. Appl Energy 2021;283:116273. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.116273. 
[24] HOMER Energy, HOMER; 2021. https://www.homerenergy.com/index.html. 
[25] Gils HC, Scholz Y, Pregger T, Luca de Tena D, Heide D. Integrated modelling of 
variable renewable energy-based power supply in Europe. Energy 2017;123. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2017.01.115. 
[26] Victoria M, Zhu K, Brown T, Andresen GB, Greiner M. Early decarbonisation of the 
European energy system pays off. Nat Commun 2020;11:6223. https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/s41467-020-20015-4. 
[27] Jacobson MZ, Delucchi MA, Cameron MA, Mathiesen BV. Matching demand with 
supply at low cost in 139 countries among 20 world regions with 100% 
intermittent wind, water, and sunlight (WWS) for all purposes. Renew Energy 
2018;123:236–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2018.02.009. 
[28] Elliston B, MacGill I, Diesendorf M. Comparing least cost scenarios for 100% 
renewable electricity with low emission fossil fuel scenarios in the Australian 
National Electricity Market. Renew Energy 2014;66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
renene.2013.12.010. 
[29] Lenzen M, McBain B, Trainer T, Jütte S, Rey-Lescure O, Huang J. Simulating low- 
carbon electricity supply for Australia. Appl Energy 2016;179. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.06.151. 
[30] Dui´c N, Da Graça Carvalho M. Increasing renewable energy sources in island 
energy supply: case study Porto Santo. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2004;8. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2003.11.004. 
[31] Pursiheimo E, Holttinen H, Koljonen T. Inter-sectoral effects of high renewable 
energy share in global energy system. Renew Energy 2019;136:1119–29. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2018.09.082. 
[32] L¨offler K, Hainsch K, Burandt T, Oei P-Y, Kemfert C, von Hirschhausen C, et al. 
Designing a model for the global energy system—GENeSYS-MOD: an application of 
the open-source energy modeling system (OSeMOSYS). Energies 2017;10:1468. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/en10101468. 
[33] Victoria M, Zeyen E, Brown T. Speed of technological transformations required in 
Europe to achieve different climate goals. Joule 2022;6:1066–86. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.joule.2022.04.016. 
D. Bogdanov et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Energy 273 (2023) 127213
14
[34] IEA-ETSAP, TIMES; 2021. https://iea-etsap.org/index.php/etsap-tools/mod 
el-generators/times. 
[35] Kotzur L, Markewitz P, Robinius M, Stolten D. Impact of different time series 
aggregation methods on optimal energy system design. Renew Energy 2018;117: 
474–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2017.10.017. 
[36] Hoffmann M, Kotzur L, Stolten D. The Pareto-optimal temporal aggregation of 
energy system models. Appl Energy 2022;315:119029. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apenergy.2022.119029. 
[37] Teichgraeber H, Brandt AR. Time-series aggregation for the optimization of energy 
systems: goals, challenges, approaches, and opportunities. Renew Sustain Energy 
Rev 2022;157. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2021.111984. 
[38] Frysztacki MM, Recht G, Brown T. A comparison of clustering methods for the 
spatial reduction of renewable electricity optimisation models of Europe. Energy 
Informatics 2022;5. https://doi.org/10.1186/s42162-022-00187-7. 
[39] Frysztacki MM, H¨orsch J, Hagenmeyer V, Brown T. The strong effect of network 
resolution on electricity system models with high shares of wind and solar. Appl 
Energy 2021;291. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2021.116726. 
[40] Wang J, Kang L, Liu Y. A multi-objective approach to determine time series 
aggregation strategies for optimal design of multi-energy systems. Energy 2022; 
258:124783. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2022.124783. 
[41] Mosek. MOSEK optimization toolbox for MATLAB 9.3.22. 2019. accessed March 
18, 2021), https://www.mosek.com/documentation/. 
[42] Bogdanov D, Farfan J, Sadovskaia K, Fasihi M, Child M, Breyer C. Arising role of 
photovoltaic and wind energy in the power sector and beyond: changing the 
Northeast Asian power landscape. Jpn J Appl Phys 2018;57. https://doi.org/ 
10.7567/JJAP.57.08RJ01. 
[43] Stackhouse P, Whitlock C. Surface meteorology and solar energy (SSE) release 6.0 
methodology. Langley, VA, USA.: National Aeronautic and Space Administration 
(NASA); 2008. 
[44] Stackhouse P, Whitlock C. Surface meteorology and solar energy (SSE) release 6.0 
methodology. Langley, VA, USA.: National Aeronautic and Space Administration 
(NASA); 2009. 
[45] Stetter D. Enhancement of the REMix energy system model: global renewable 
energy potentials, optimized power plant siting and scenario validation. Faculty of 
energy-, process- and bio-engineering, University of Stuttgart; 2012. PhD thesis. 
[46] Renewable Energy Institute, Agora Energiewende. Renewable pathways to climate- 
neutral Japan. LUT University; 2021. 
[47] Bogdanov D, Oyewo AS, Odai TNM, Nishida Y, Gagnebin M, Shimoyama T, et al. 
Energy transition for Japan: pathways towards 100% renewable energy system in 
2050. 2023. submitted for publication. 
D. Bogdanov et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
