Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6, 1543-1575; doi:10.3390/ph6121543 
 
pharmaceuticals 
ISSN 1424-8247 
www.mdpi.com/journal/pharmaceuticals 
Review 
Antimicrobial Peptides 
Ali Adem Bahar 1,2 and Dacheng Ren 1,2,3,4,* 
1 Department of Biomedical and Chemical Engineering, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 13244, USA; 
E-Mail: abahar@syr.edu 
2 Syracuse Biomaterials Institute, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 13244, USA 
3 Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 13244, USA 
4 Department of Biology, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 13244, USA 
* Author to whom correspondence should be addressed; E-Mail: dren@syr.edu;  
Tel.: +1-315-443-4409; Fax: +1-315-443-9175. 
Received: 22 October 2013; in revised form: 21 November 2013 / Accepted: 25 November 2013 /  
Published: 28 November 2013  
 
Abstract: The rapid increase in drug-resistant infections has presented a serious challenge 
to antimicrobial therapies. The failure of the most potent antibiotics to kill “superbugs” 
emphasizes the urgent need to develop other control agents. Here we review the history 
and new development of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs), a growing class of natural and 
synthetic peptides with a wide spectrum of targets including viruses, bacteria, fungi, and 
parasites. We summarize the major types of AMPs, their modes of action, and the common 
mechanisms of AMP resistance. In addition, we discuss the principles for designing 
effective AMPs and the potential of using AMPs to control biofilms (multicellular 
structures of bacteria embedded in extracellular matrixes) and persister cells (dormant 
phenotypic variants of bacterial cells that are highly tolerant to antibiotics). 
Keywords: antimicrobial peptide; biofilm; persister 
 
1. Sources and History of Antimicrobial Peptides 
Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are oligopeptides with a varying number (from five to over a 
hundred) of amino acids. AMPs have a broad spectrum of targeted organisms ranging from viruses to 
parasites. Historically AMPs have also been referred to as cationic host defense peptides [1], anionic 
antimicrobial peptides/proteins [2], cationic amphipathic peptides [3], cationic AMPs [4], host defense 
peptides [5], and α-helical antimicrobial peptides [6]. 
OPEN ACCESS
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1544 
 
 
The discovery of AMPs dates back to 1939, when Dubos [7,8] extracted an antimicrobial agent 
from a soil Bacillus strain. This extract was demonstrated to protect mice from pneumococci infection. 
In the following year, Hotchkiss and Dubos [9] fractionated this extract and identified an AMP which 
was named gramicidin. Despite some reported toxicity associated with intraperitoneal application [9], 
gramicidin was found effective for topical treatment of wounds and ulcers [10]. In 1941, another AMP, 
tyrocidine, was discovered and found to be effective against both Gram-negative and Gram-positive 
bacteria [11]. However, tyrocidine exhibited toxicity to human blood cells [12]. In the same year, 
another AMP was isolated from a plant Triticumaestivum [13], which was later named purothionin and 
found effective against fungi and some pathogenic bacteria [14]. 
The first reported animal-originated AMP is defensin, which was isolated from rabbit leukocytes in 
1956 [15]. In the following years, bombinin from epithelia [16] and lactoferrin from cow milk [17] 
were both described. During the same time, it was also proven that human leukocytes contain AMPs in 
their lysosomes [18]. 
In total, more than 5,000 AMPs have been discovered or synthesized up to date [19]. Natural AMPs 
can be found in both prokaryotes (e.g., bacteria) and eukaryotes (e.g., protozoan, fungi, plants, insects, 
and animals) [20–23]. In animals, AMPs are mostly found in the tissues and organs that are exposed to 
airborne pathogens; and are believed to be the first line of the innate immune defense [24,25] against 
viruses, bacteria, and fungi [21]. Thus, AMPs play an important role in stopping most infections before 
they cause any symptoms. For example, frog skin is the source of more than 300 different AMPs [20,26]. 
Most AMPs are produced by specific cells at all times, while the production of some AMPs is 
inducible. For example, using silk moth as a model system, Hultmark and colleagues [27] demonstrated 
that P9A and P9B can be induced in hemolymph by vaccination with Enterobacter cloacae. In another 
study [28], epithelial cells from different tissues of mice showed increased rate of mRNA transcription 
for defensin production after infection with Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1. 
Several types of eukaryotic cells are involved in AMP production such as lymphs, epithelial cells in 
gastrointestinal and genitourinary systems [29,30], phagocytes [31], and lymphocytes of the immune 
system [21,32]. In addition to direct involvement in innate immunity, AMPs have also been found  
to influence host’s inflammatory responses during an infection [33–35]. It is known that 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) molecules, released from bacteria as a result of antibiotic treatment or host 
immunity, can induce AMP production in mammals [31]. For example, HEK293 cells produce 
defensin in response to LPS stimulation [36]. Some AMPs (e.g., CAP18 [37], CAP35 [38], and a 
lactoferrin-derivative [39]) can also block LPS-induced cytokine release by macrophages. Thus, these 
AMPs can reduce inflammatory response. In comparison, antibiotics do not have this type of 
regulation on inflammatory response of the host immune system; and LPS secretion following 
antibiotic treatment might cause over-reaction of the host immune system. In some extreme cases, this 
can even lead to sepsis [31,40]. 
2. Structure and Major Activities of AMPs 
Most AMPs reported to date can be characterized as one of the following four types based on their 
secondary structures: β-sheet, α-helix, extended, and loop. Among these structural groups, α-helix and 
β-sheet structures are more common [41]; and α-helical peptides are the most studied AMPs to date.  
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1545 
 
 
In α-helix structures the distance between two adjacent amino acids is around 0.15 nm and the angle 
between them with regard to the center is around 100 degree from the top view (Figure 1A). The best 
known examples of such AMPs are protegrin, magainin, cyclic indolicin, and coiled indolicin [6].  
β-sheet peptides are composed of at least two β-strands with disulfide bonds between these strands [42]. 
Figure 1. Schematic representation of an α-helical AMP. This figure assumes the same  
α-helix propensity for all amino acids in the peptide structure. (A) Helical wheel projection 
of the AMP (top view). The angle between two consecutive amino acids in the sequence is 
100 degree. Dotted lines show two adjacent amino acids in the primary structure. (B) Side 
view of the peptide. The distance between two adjacent amino acids, “n”, is 0.15 nm. 
 
While most AMPs belong to one of the above four classes, some AMPs do not belong to any of 
these groups [43]. Some AMPs contain two different structural components [44]. Also, many peptides 
form their active structure only when they interact with the membranes of target cells. For example, 
indolicin shows globular and amphipathic conformation in aqueous solutions while it is wedge-shaped 
in lipid bilayer mimicking environments [45]. This AMP also changes its conformation during 
interaction with DNA evidenced with decreased fluorescence intensity and a slight shift in the 
wavelength of maximum emission [46]. 
Unlikely antibiotics, which target specific cellular activities (e.g., synthesis of DNA, protein, or  
cell wall), AMPs target the lipopolysaccharide layer of cell membrane, which is ubiquitous in 
microorganisms. Having a high level of cholesterol and low anionic charge puts eukaryotic cells out of 
the target range of many AMPs [47]. 
Another important feature of AMPs is their rapid killing effect. Some AMPs can kill in seconds 
after the initial contact with cell membrane [48]. AMPs are also known to enhance the activities of 
antibiotics through synergistic effects. For example, the combination of penicillin with pediocin and 
ampicillin with nisin Z exhibited killing of Pseudomonas fluorescens with 13- and 155-fold lower 
minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC), respectively, compared to using antibiotics alone [49]. 
Because AMPs are made with amino acids, it is relatively easy to modify the structure (including 
library construction and screening) and immobilize AMPs on surfaces [50]. It is possible to make fully 
synthetic peptides by chemical synthesis [51] or by using recombinant expression systems [52,53]. 
These artificial sources of AMPs are useful for modification of existing AMPs and for designing new 
synthetic AMPs. Such modifications have potential to change the targets of AMPs and improve the 
stability of AMPs against proteases [54]. 
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1546 
 
 
Despite these advantageous features of AMPs, there are still some challenges to their applications, 
such as potential toxicity to humans [12,55,56], sensitivity to harsh environmental conditions 
(susceptibility to proteases and extreme pH [57,58]), lack of selectivity against specific strains [59], 
high production costs [60], folding issues of some large AMPs [61], reduced activity when used for 
surface coating [62], and bacterial resistance to some AMPs [63,64]. In the following section we will 
discuss the modes of actions of AMPs and the current efforts to address the above challenges. 
3. Major Categories of AMPs and Mechanisms of Action 
3.1. Classification 
In general, enzymatic mechanisms are not involved in the antimicrobial activities of AMPs [65]. 
For example, even though lysozyme is a monomeric peptide, it is not classified as an AMP because it 
is relatively large (148 aa) and kills bacteria through enzymatic activities by breaking 1,4--linkages in 
peptidoglycan chains [66]. In this review, we categorize AMPs based on their target, and mode of 
action. For natural AMPs, we will focus on those from eukaryotes, especially mammals. 
3.1.1. Antiviral Peptides 
Antiviral AMPs neutralize viruses by integrating in either the viral envelope or the host cell 
membrane. Previous studies have shown that both enveloped RNA and DNA viruses can be targeted 
by antiviral AMPs [67,68]. AMPs can integrate into viral envelopes and cause membrane instability, 
rendering the viruses unable to infect host cells [69,70]. AMPs can also reduce the binding of viruses 
to host cells [71]. For example, defensins bind to the viral glycoproteins making herpes simplex 
viruses (HSV) unable to bind to the surface of host cells [72]. 
Besides disruption of viral envelopes and blocking viral receptors, some antiviral AMPs can prevent 
viral particles from entering host cells by occupying specific receptors on mammalian cells [73,74]. 
For example, heparan sulfate is important for the attachment of HSV viral particles to the host cell 
surface [75]. The heparan sulfate molecules are negatively charged glycosaminoglycan molecules [76]. 
Thus, some α-helical cationic peptides, e.g., lactoferrin [77], can prevent HSV infections by binding to 
heparan molecules and blocking virus-receptor interactions [78]. 
Compared to the above AMPs that target viral receptors on cell surface, some AMPs do not 
compete with viral glycoproteins for binding to the heparansulphate receptors on cell surface. Instead, 
these antiviral AMPs can cross the cell membrane and localize in the cytoplasm and organelles, 
causing changes in the gene expression profile of the host cells, which can help the host defense 
system fight against viruses or block viral gene expression. For example, NP-1, an AMP from rabbit 
neutrophils, prevents Vero and CaSki cell lines from infection by herpes simplex viruses type 2  
(HSV-2). This AMP stops the viruses by preventing the migration of a major viral protein, VP16, into 
the nucleus. This viral protein is required to form complexes with the host transcriptional factors to 
induce the expression of immediate early viral genes, which are required for the virus to defeat the first 
stage cellular response [79]. Thus, this AMP does not compete with viral particles to bind to the 
receptor on cell surface but it prevents cell-to-cell spread of viral particles [80]. 
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1547 
 
 
3.1.2. Antibacterial Peptides 
Antibacterial AMPs are the most studied AMPs to date and most of them are cationic AMPs, which 
target bacterial cell membranes and cause disintegration of the lipid bilayer structure [81,82].  
The majority of these AMPs are also amphipathic with both hydrophilic and hydrophobic domains. 
Such structures provide AMPs the capability to bind to lipid components (hydrophobic region) and 
phospholipid groups (hydrophilic region) [47]. 
Interestingly, researchers have demonstrated that some AMPs at low concentrations can kill 
bacteria without changing the membrane integrity. Instead of directly interacting with the membrane, 
these AMPs kill bacteria by inhibiting some important pathways inside the cell such as DNA 
replication and protein synthesis [83]. For example, buforin II can diffuse into cells and bind to DNA 
and RNA without damaging the cell membrane [84]. Drosocin, pyrrhocoricin, and apidaecin are other 
examples of such AMPs. These AMPs have 18–20 amino acid residues with an active site for their 
intracellular target [85,86]. 
In some cases, certain AMPs have been shown to kill antibiotic resistant bacteria. For example, 
both nisin (an AMP) and vancomycin (an antibiotic), can block cell wall synthesis. However,  
a methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) strain was reported to be resistant to vancomycin, 
while it is still sensitive to nisin [87]. 
3.1.3. Antifungal Peptides 
Like antibacterial AMPs, antifungal peptides can kill fungi by targeting either the cell wall [88,89] 
or intracellular components [90]. However, bacterial membrane and fungi cell wall have different 
contents. For example, chitin is one of the major components of fungal cell walls and some of 
antifungal peptides are capable of binding to chitin [91–93]. Such binding ability helps AMPs to target 
fungal cells efficiently. Cell wall targeting-antifungal AMPs kill the target cells by disrupting the 
integrity of fungal membranes [94,95], by increasing permeabilization of the plasma membrane [96], 
or by forming pores directly [97]. 
Although the majority of antifungal AMPs have polar and neutral amino acids in their structures, [47] 
there does not appear to be a clear correlation between the structure of an AMP and the type of cells 
that it targets. For example, antifungal peptides have members from different structure classes such as 
α-helical (D-V13K [98] and P18 [99]), extended (indolicin [100]), and β-sheet (defensins [101]). 
3.1.4. Antiparasitic Peptides 
Antiparasitic peptides are a smaller group compared to other three AMP classes. The first antiparasitic 
peptide reported is magainin, which is able to kill Paramecium caudatum [102]. Later, a synthetic 
peptide was developed against Leishmania parasite [103]. Another example of antiparasitic peptide is 
cathelicidin, which is able to kill Caernohabditis elegans by forming pores in the cell membrane [104]. 
Even though some parasitic microorganisms are multicellular, the mode of action of antiparasitic 
peptides is the same as other AMPs. They kill cells by directly interacting with cell membrane [104]. 
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1548 
 
 
3.2. Mechanism of Action 
As described above, AMPs kill cells by disrupting membrane integrity (via interaction with 
negatively charged cell membrane), by inhibiting proteins, DNA and RNA synthesis, or by interacting 
with certain intracellular targets. All AMPs known by the late-90s are cationic. However, the concept 
that AMPs need to be cationic was changed later with the discovery of negatively charged AMPs in 
1997 [105]. For example maximin-H5 [106] from frog skin and dermicidin [107] secreted from sweat 
gland tissues of human are both anionic peptides. 
Generally an AMP is only effective against one class of microorganisms (e.g., bacteria or fungi) [31]. 
However, there are exceptions and some AMPs are known to have different modes of action against 
different types of microorganisms. For example, indolicidin can kill bacteria, fungi, and HIV [69,108]. 
It exhibits antifungal activities by causing damages to cell membrane [100]. However, it kills E. coli 
by penetrating into the cells and inhibiting DNA synthesis [109]; and it shows anti-HIV activities by 
inhibiting HIV-integrase [110]. In comparison; some AMPs have the same mode of killing of different 
cell types. For example, PMAP-23 can kill both fungi and parasites by forming pores in their cell 
membranes [104,111]. 
One third of the total proteins of a bacterial cell are associated with the membrane and these 
proteins have many functions that are critical to the cell including active transport of nutrients, 
respiration, proton motive force, ATP generation, and intercellular communication [112]. The function 
of these proteins can be altered with AMP treatment even if complete cell lysis does not occur. 
Therefore, AMPs’ rapid killing effect does not only come from membrane disruption but can also 
come from inhibition of these functional proteins. 
3.2.1. Membrane-Active AMPs 
Even if intracellular targets are involved, an initial cell membrane interaction with peptides is 
required for the antimicrobial activities of AMPs [113]; and this interaction determines the spectrum of 
target cells. Most membrane-active AMPs are amphipathic, which means that they have both cationic 
and hydrophobic faces. This feature ensures the initial electrostatic interaction with the negatively 
charged cell membrane and the insertion into membrane interior. The actions of AMPs do not stop 
after this initial interaction. The hydrophobic part of an AMP helps insert the AMP molecule into the 
cell membrane [114]. So the interaction mainly includes ionic and hydrophobic interactions. These 
interactions mostly depend on two properties, e.g., cationic state and hydrophobicity of the peptide. 
The major types of membrane-active AMPs and the mechanisms of their actions are summarized in 
Table 1 and Figure 2. 
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1549 
 
 
Table 1. The action mechanisms of membrane-active AMPs. 
Interaction model 
Mechanism 
References 
Carpet like 
(Detergent-like) 
The peptide micelle touches the membrane first and coats a small 
area of the membrane. Then AMP molecules penetrate the lipid 
bilayer to let pore formation occur leaving holes behind. 
[115–117] 
Membrane thinning 
AMPs insert themselves into only one side of the lipid bilayer. It can 
form a gap between lipid molecules at the chain region. This gap 
creates a force and pulls the neighboring lipid molecules to fill it. 
[118–120] 
Aggregate 
AMPs stick to the membrane parallel to the surface. Then 
reorientation of AMPs occurs and they insert themselves into the 
membrane vertically to form sphere-like structures. 
[115,121–123] 
Toroidal pore 
AMPs align perpendicularly into the bilayer structure with their 
hydrophobic regions associated with the center part of the lipid 
bilayer and their hydrophilic regions facing the pore. 
[83,123] 
Barrel-stave 
Staves are formed first parallel to the cell membrane. Then barrels 
are formed and AMPs are inserted perpendicularly to the plane of 
the membrane bilayer. 
[82,124,125] 
Figure 2. Schematic representation of some action mechanisms of membrane-active AMPs. 
(A) Barrel-Stave model. AMP molecules insert themselves into the membrane perpendicularly. 
(B) Carpet model. Small areas of the membrane are coated with AMP molecules with 
hydrophobic sides facing inward leaving pores behind in the membrane. (C) Toroidal pore 
model. This model resembles the Barrel-stave model, but AMPs are always in contact with 
phospholipid head groups of the membrane. The blue color represents the hydrophobic 
portions of AMPs, while the red color represents the hydrophilic parts of the AMPs. 
 
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1550 
 
 
3.2.2. Intracellularly Active AMPs 
In early AMP studies, permeabilization of bacterial cell membrane by AMP was thought as the 
primary mechanism of killing. It was suggested that AMPs should be used at concentrations high 
enough so that they can kill microorganisms by disrupting the membrane with sufficient channels and 
pores [126]. However, some AMPs were found to start membrane permeabilization at concentrations 
lower than their MICs, while others could only do so at concentrations higher than their MICs.  
The finding that some AMPs can kill their target cells without causing membrane permeabilization 
suggests that there may be other mechanisms of killing. Recently, intracellularly active AMPs have 
been shown to interact with targets inside the cells [127–129]. For example indolicin was shown to 
bind to DNA with a preferred sequence [46,130]. 
Some AMPs can inhibit DNA and protein synthesis [131,132]. One example of this is PR-39, an 
AMP from pig intestines, which kills bacteria in a non-lytic process by acting like a proteolytic agent 
and stopping protein and DNA synthesis [133]. Similar to PR-39, indolicin does not lyse cells directly. 
It enters the cytoplasm and kills bacterial cells by targeting DNA synthesis [109,131]. Also, some 
human immune system derived AMPs such as tPMP-1 and aHNP-1 inhibit DNA and protein synthesis 
within an hour after they enter the cells [134]. Apidaecin is another protein synthesis blocking AMP 
which lacks pore forming ability. This AMP is only effective against Gram-negative bacteria. It is 
suggested that this AMP is actively transported with a transporter protein and then it blocks protein 
synthesis with a series of molecular interactions with different targets [135]. 
Some AMPs can also inhibit proteases of microbes. For example, histatin 5 stops the periodontal 
tissue destruction by inhibiting a protease from Bacteriocides gingivalis [136]; and eNAP-2 has  
anti-protease activities against microbial serin proteases [137]. Interestingly, there are some 
intracellular AMPs which can only kill cells at certain growth stages. For example, diptericin is only 
effective against actively growing bacterial cells, suggesting it may interact with certain specific 
metabolic pathways during bacterial growth [138,139]. 
Among these intracellularly active AMPs, some of them have multiple targets. For example 
seminalplasmin inhibits RNA polymerase and can stop RNA synthesis completely at concentrations 
lower than many other antibacterial agents [140]. On the other hand, the same AMP can activate an 
autolysin protein inside the target cells leading to autolysis [141,142]. 
The finding that AMPs can inhibit intracellular pathways [126,131] suggest that there might be 
mechanisms of cellular uptake of AMPs. Two such mechanisms have been reported: direct penetration 
and endocystosis [114]. According to Jones [143], cellular uptake of AMPs can take place through 
endocytosis, which includes macropinocytosis and receptor mediated endocytosis. In macropinocytosis, 
the cell membrane folds inward and forms vesicles with the help of dynamin proteins. These vesicles 
are called macropinosomes and they are like small cells with only a membrane around them [114].  
In receptor mediated endocytosis, a part of the membrane is coated with clathrin or caveolin proteins 
followed by pit formation. Later, these pits bud from the membrane to inner side of the cell and form 
vesicles [143,144]. 
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1551 
 
 
4. Designing New Synthetic AMPs: Major Factors to Consider 
To date, no data have been reported to demonstrate a clear relationship between the structural 
groups of an AMP and its mode of action, the degree of activity, or the host range. Even the AMPs 
with very similar structures can have drastically different mechanisms of action and the range of 
targeted cells [47]. For example, buforin targets DNA and RNA; while magainin 2, an AMP with 
similar structure, targets the cell membrane causing cell lysis [145,146]. Although a structure-based 
precise prediction of activity, mode of action, and host range may not be possible, certain general 
design principles have been proposed by previous studies. The AMP structure is certainly important, 
while the size, charge, hydrophobicity, amphipathicity, and solubility are all crucial physiochemical 
properties for their antimicrobial activities and target specificity of AMPs [147]. Changing these 
features will help to modify the activity and target spectrum of AMPs. 
4.1. Important Physiochemical Properties of AMPs 
4.1.1. Length 
The length of an AMP is important to its activity because at least 7–8 amino acids are needed to 
form amphipathic structures with hydrophobic and hydrophilic faces on opposite sides of a peptide 
molecule. The size for an AMP to transverse the lipid bilayer of bacteria in the barrel-stave model 
should be at least 22 amino acids for α-helical AMPs, while eight amino acids are needed for β-sheet 
AMPs [148]. Besides the effects of length on its 3D structure and mode of action, the length of an 
AMP may also affect its cytotoxicity. For example, a shortened melittin with 15 residues at its  
C-terminal [149] and a shorter derivative of HP(2-20) [150] exhibited at least 300 times less toxicity to rat 
erythrocytes and human erythrocytes, respectively, compared to their original forms. Therefore the length 
of AMP should be taken into consideration when designing new synthetic peptides with low toxicity. 
4.1.2. Net Charge 
The net charge of known AMPs, which is the sum of all charges of ionizable groups of the peptide, 
varies from negative to positive and it is the main factor for the initial interaction with negatively 
charged cell membranes. By changing the net charge of an AMP, its antimicrobial and hemolytic 
activities can be altered to achieve selective killing of microbes with no or minimized effects on host 
cells. For example, increasing positive net charge of V13K from +8 to +9 resulted in higher hemolytic 
activity, while decreasing the net charge to lower than +4 abolished its activity against P. aeruginosa [98]. 
4.1.3. Helicity 
Helicity represents the ability of an AMP to form spin structure. It is less important for the activity 
of an AMP compared to other factors discussed above. However, it is important for determining the 
toxicity on eukaryotic cells [6]. Reducing helicity by incorporating D-amino acids into the primary 
sequence has been shown to lower the hemolytic effect, while the antimicrobial effect was retained [151]. 
For example, Papo et al. [54] modified some α-helical peptides by replacing 35% of the L-amino acids 
with D-amino acids and found that this modification eliminated the hemolytic activity. Besides, these 
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1552 
 
 
new synthetic AMPs are not sensitive to proteases. Therefore, incorporating D-amino acids to change 
helicity is a useful strategy for designing new synthetic peptides with less hemolytic activity and 
enhanced stability against proteolytic cleavage. Another important factor associated with the helicity of 
AMP is the helix propensity of each amino acid in the primary sequence. For example, proline and 
glycine have lower helix-forming propensities compared to other amino acids [152]. Thus, these 
residues are not preferred when designing α-helical AMPs. In addition, peptides should be flexible 
enough to change their conformation during the membrane insertion process [47]. 
4.1.4. Hydrophobicity 
Hydrophobicity has also been shown to influence the activity and selectivity of AMP molecules. 
Almost 50% of amino acids in the primary sequence of natural AMPs are hydrophobic residues [147]. 
In most cases, increase in hydrophobicity on the positively charged side of an AMP below a threshold 
can increase its antimicrobial activity [6], while decreasing hydrophobicity can reduce antimicrobial 
activity [153]. There appears to be an optimal hydrophobicity for each AMP, beyond which its activity 
decreases rapidly [129]. Therefore, when designing new synthetic peptides, the hydrophobicity should 
be selected within an optimal window. Some previous studies have shown that hydrophobicity is also 
critical for determining the range of target cells of an AMP. Increasing the hydrophobicity of an AMP 
can change the range of targets [154,155]. For example, magainin is an AMP that is only effective 
against Gram-negative bacteria. However, some synthetic analogs with higher hydrophobicity can also 
kill some Gram-positive bacteria and eukaryotic cells [156]. 
4.1.5. Amphipathicity 
Amphipathicity is another important property of AMPs to ensure their activity and interaction with 
microbial membranes. Fernandes-Vidal et al. [157] showed that amphipathicity is more important than 
hydrophobicity for binding to microbial membranes. Because amphipathicity of AMPs is required for 
a strong partition into the membrane interface, priority should be given to the amphipathic structure 
when designing synthetic AMPs for specific target cells. 
4.1.6. Solubility 
Since AMPs should act on or enter through lipid membranes, they need to be soluble in aqueous 
environments. If AMP molecules aggregate, it will lose its ability to interact with the cell membrane. 
For example, a hybrid synthetic AMP composed of cecropin and melittin has a tendency to form 
dimers. Substituting a Lys residue on the non-polar face of this hybrid AMP prevents dimerization and 
leads to reduced hemolytic activity. Losing dimerization ability makes this AMP more effective for its 
incorporation into microbial membranes [158]. This example demonstrates the importance of solubility 
and the value of structural optimization. 
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1553 
 
 
4.2. The Relationship between Physiochemical Properties of AMPs 
As discussed above, many factors affect the activities of AMPs and some interactions exist between 
these factors. In AMP design, these properties need to be considered together since changing one of 
these parameters to get a desired modification of an AMP may alter other parameters. Even a simple 
change in primary sequence can affect many other physicochemical parameters which are often vital 
for the activity of an AMP and the range of target cells [159]. Predicting the results of an AMP 
modification or the function of a synthetic peptide beforehand is still an unmet challenge. Application 
of molecular simulation to analyze the details of the folding of AMP molecules and interaction with 
target cells [160,161] may be a promising approach to improve current trial and error methods. 
4.3. AMP Modifications 
While most of AMPs are directly synthesized in their active forms, post-translational modification 
of certain AMPs is necessary for their functions. Naturally forming AMPs are processed with different 
post-translational modifications such as phosphorylation [162], addition of D-amino acids [163,164], 
methylation [165], amidation [166], glycosylation [167], formation of disulphide linkage [168], and 
proteolytic cleavage [24,169]. In some cases, these posttranslational modifications might be important 
for designing new synthetic AMPs. Even though recombinant cell systems can be used to produce 
these synthetic peptides with post-translational modifications, incorporation of unnatural amino acids 
may require chemical synthesis [60]. 
4.3.1. Modification of AMPs with Covalent Bonds 
Covalent modification can have profound effects on the structure and function of an AMP. Even a 
single disulfide bond can change the antimicrobial effect of an AMP. For example, protegrin missing a 
disulphide bond becomes inactive against HSV [170]; while adding disulphide bond in sakacin P 
resulted in higher antimicrobial activities [44]. In another study, a disulfide bond was added in CP-11, 
a derivative of indolicidin [171], and a trp-trp cross-link was added in indolicin [172]. These modified 
structures of indolicidins showed higher protease stability with no change in antimicrobial activity. 
However increase in stability does not always lead to better AMPs. For example, Houston et al. [173] 
introduced a covalent bond to form a lactam bridge between Gln and Lys residues in two α-helical 
AMPs, e.g., cecropin and mellitin. This modification helped AMPs to form more stable α-helix 
structures but decreased the antimicrobial activity of both. 
4.3.2. Modification of AMPs by Changing Amino Acid Content 
Alteration of amino acid content is one of the most studied strategies of AMP modification. Most of 
these studies focus on certain amino acids since their physiological characteristics play important roles 
in the activity and target spectrum of AMPs. For example proline content in the primary sequence of 
an AMP has been found to affect its ability to penetrate cell membranes. Higher proline content 
reduces the capability of CP26 to permeablize E. coli cell membrane [174]. This effect might be 
because of proline’s low propensity to form α-helical structures. Thus changes in the proline content 
may lead to alterations of α-helical posture of an AMP. 
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1554 
 
 
Changing amino acid content can also affect cytotoxicity. In a study by Nell et al. [175], LL37, a 
human AMP, was modified by removing neutral amino acids Asn and Gln, and adding more positively 
charged residues (two Arg units) into the primary sequence. The new synthetic peptide showed less 
cytotoxic effects on eukaryotic cells. This peptide was named P60.4 and has been successfully used in 
nasal applications against MRSA [176]. Another strategy to improve AMP stability is to include  
D-amino acids in the sequence because they are more tolerant to proteases [177,178]. 
4.3.3. Modification of AMPs by Amidation 
With new developments in peptide synthesis, it is possible to incorporate special chemical groups or 
unnatural molecules into AMPs. One of these modifications is the addition of amide groups at the end 
of the peptides. In 2011, Kim et al. [179] modified PMAP-23 with amidation at the carboxyl end and 
found that this derivative of PMAP-23 orients perpendicularly inside the bacterial membrane while 
original PMAP-23 orients parallel to the membrane. This modification resulted in almost 10 fold 
higher cellular uptake, faster interaction with Gram-negative bacteria cell membrane, and deeper 
insertion into the inner membrane than the original PMAP-23. This carboxyl-end amidated synthetic 
peptide also showed better membrane-permeabilization in liposome release tests [179]. Therefore 
amidation of carboxyl end has good potential to improve the function of synthetic AMPs. 
C-terminal modifications can also affect the stability of AMPs. In a previous study by Berthold  
et al. [180], the C-terminal amide group of Api88 was replaced by a free acid. This modification did 
not change its antimicrobial activity, but resulted in a 15 times more stable Api88 derivative against 
proteases in blood serum. Replacing Arg-17 of this AMP with L-ornithine or L-homoarginine gave 35 
times higher proteolytic stability than the original Api88. However, the latter modification decreased 
the antimicrobial activity by eight fold [180]. 
4.3.4. Modification of AMPs with Unnatural Amino Acids 
A number of studies on synthetic peptides have attempted to incorporate unnatural amino acids into 
the primary sequence [99,181,182]. β-didehydrophenylalanine is an unnatural amino acids and is used 
to provide better folding properties for AMPs [181]. It is widely used in medicinal chemistry to alter 
the native bioactive AMPs [183]. Incorporation of β-didehydrophenylalanine in the primary sequence 
of VS1 resulted in higher stability against proteases. Researchers have also been able to introduce 
antifungal activities to some AMPs by incorporating undecanoic acid and palmitic acid into their 
primary sequence [99,184]. 
4.3.5. Modification of AMPs with Computer-Assisted Methods 
The use of computer-assisted methods in AMP research has been increasing significantly [185–190]. 
Estimating the structure of an AMP based on its primary sequence [191], then predicting potential 
mechanism of action and activity is becoming easier with the help of computational approaches [192]. 
These types of artificial AMP design strategies hold potential for developing new synthetic peptides 
against antibiotic-resistant superbugs [190]. Several databases about AMPs have been created and can 
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1555 
 
 
be accessed to compare currently available AMPs. One of the latest AMP databases, LAMP (linking 
antimicrobial peptides), currently has 3904 natural and 1643 synthetic peptides [19]. 
4.4. New AMP Design by Homology Modeling 
Most studies about AMPs to date are inspired by natural AMPs. For example, Tossi et al. [193] 
designed some synthetic peptides by identifying the common amphipathic structure of 87 different 
natural α-helical AMPs. These natural AMPs are composed mainly of cecropins, magainins, brevinins, 
and cathelicidin peptides sourced from insects, amphibian, and mammals. This synthetic peptide study 
focused on the first 20 amino acids in each sequence because the N-terminal region was shown to be 
necessary for antimicrobial activities [194,195]. The synthetic peptides designed based on this strategy 
are able to transform into α-helical structures from random structures with the addition of 
trifluoroethanol in aqueous environments. These synthetic AMPs exhibited antimicrobial activities 
against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, including some drug resistant strains. In addition, 
these synthetic AMPs showed low toxicity to some eukaryotic cell lines [193]. 
Designing synthetic AMPs by homology modeling within the same class might also provide a better 
understanding of activity-structure relationship. Important elements from the same AMP class may be 
identified using this approach to help design better molecules. Storici et al. [195] showed that  
20 residues (named PMAP-36) of an antibacterial peptide from pig bone marrow cells are sufficient for 
related antibacterial activity. The AMP with these 20 residues was chemically synthesized and showed 
the capability to form α-helix in the presence of trifluoroethanol. This short synthetic peptide was 
found to induce permeabilization of the inner membrane of E. coli ML35 at concentrations lower than 
50 µM; while even at 100 µM it did not cause any permeabilization to human erythrocytes [195].  
In another study of homology modeling, arenicin, protegrin, and thanatin were used as templates to 
generate three synthetic peptides: AMP72, AMP126 and AMP2041. These new synthetic AMPs 
showed lower cytotoxicity compared to the original AMPs and exhibited dose dependent antimicrobial 
activities (0.17 to 10.12 μM) against Gram-negative bacteria [196]. 
It is also possible to broaden the target spectrum of an AMP by homology modeling. For example, 
normally lactoferrampins are not effective against E. coli O157. A conserved sequence, which 
corresponds to an α-helical region, among these AMPs was found, by aligning multiple sequences with 
ClustalW analysis. This common region was modified by inserting GKLI sequence into its primary 
sequence, and the new synthetic peptide showed activities against E. coli O157 with a more stable 
structure compared to other lactoferrampins [197]. 
5. New Targets of AMPs: Biofilms, Persister Cells, and Drug Resistance Bacteria 
Because AMPs can directly target bacterial cells, they have potential to control antibiotic tolerant 
cells. Here we review some recent work on biofilms and persister cells. Biofilms are immobile 
bacterial populations attached to surfaces such as human tissues and medical implants. Biofilm 
formation on implant surfaces is a serious problem since every year more than $3 billion is spent to 
treat implant-associated biofilm infections in the U.S. alone [198]. With cells protected by an 
extracellular matrix, biofilms are highly tolerant to antimicrobials [199] and are a major cause of 
chronic infections; e.g., approximately 80% of human bacterial infections are associated with  
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1556 
 
 
biofilms [200]. In addition to the protection by the extracellular matrix [201], biofilm associated 
antibiotic resistance is also attributed to the slow growth of biofilm cells [202]. Even though some 
antibiotics have been shown to effectively penetrate biofilm matrix [203], they are not effective against 
these slowly growing cells, especially the dormant subpopulation known as persister cells [204–206]. 
Since most AMPs target cell membrane, they may be more effective against these dormant cells 
compared to antibiotics. 
5.1. Biofilm Control 
The first obstacle of using AMPs against biofilms is the possible electrostatic interaction between 
cationic peptides and negatively charged biofilm matrix [207]. Such interactions may retard or prevent 
AMPs from reaching biofilm cells. Previous studies have investigated the effects of some AMPs on 
biofilm inhibition and killing of bacterial cells in established biofilms. The second type of study is 
especially important since treatment of mature biofilms is highly challenging [205]. In a study by 
Singh et al. [208], lactoferrin was found to block biofilm formation of P. aeroginosa at concentrations 
lower than those required to kill the planktonic cells. Also, LL-37, a human cathelicidin AMP, was 
shown to prevent P. aeruginosa biofilm formation at the concentration of 0.5 µg/mL, which is below 
its MIC (64 µg/mL). This AMP also showed activity against preformed (2-days old) P. aeruginosa 
biofilms; e.g., it reduced the biofilm thickness by 60% and destroyed microcolony structures of the 
treated biofilms [209]. In another study, a derivative of LL-37 was found effective against both  
Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. Despite its weak antimicrobial activity against planktonic 
cells, this AMP inhibited biofilm formation of P. aeruginosa, Burkholderia cenocepacia, and Listeria 
monocytogenes with more than 50% reduction in biofilm mass compared to untreated controls [210]. 
The same study showed that this inhibition is due to decrease in swarming and swimming motilities, 
increase in twitching motility, and repression of some biofilm genes. 
In addition to free AMPs, surface coating with AMPs has also been pursued since surface 
modifications with AMPs might help reduce device associated infections [211–214]. Many AMPs 
have been tested for their inhibitory effects on biofilm formation on implant surfaces. For example, 
Tet-20, a synthetic peptide (KRWRIRVRVIRKC), tethered on an implant surface exhibited broad 
antimicrobial activities both in vivo (rats) and in vitro. It is able to stop biofilm formation and appears 
to be non-toxic to eukaryotic cells [211]. In another study, histatin 5 and lactoferrin were used to coat 
Ti surfaces covered with an anchor peptide minTBP (RKLPDAP), which helps binding of AMP to Ti 
surfaces. The conjugates of both AMPs resulted in higher binding efficiency to Ti surfaces than AMPs 
alone and Porphyromonas gingivalis showed less ATP activity and reduced biofilm formation on 
coated surfaces [215]. 
In addition to naturally existing AMPs, some synthetic AMPs were also used to treat biofilms. A 
synthetic histatin analogue dhvar4 was tested against oral flora on hydroxyapatite disks and this AMP 
reduced the number of viable biofilm cells by 1.5 log compared to the control [216]. MUC7, a native 
saliva AMP from humans, and its modified forms, MUC17 12-mer-L and 20-mer, showed inhibitory 
effects on S. mutans biofilm formation [217]. In another study, a derivative of LL-37 which is an AMP 
from human innate immune system, cleared P. sinusitis biofilms in vivo (New Zealand rabbits). 
However, it also led to some toxicity and proinflammation in the sinuses [218]. 
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1557 
 
 
As discussed above, the extracellular matrix of a biofilm is thought to form a diffusion barrier 
against certain AMPs [199]. It is known that this negatively charged barrier protects the cells inside 
from positively charged antimicrobial agents and the alginate in biofilm matrix can reduce the 
diffusion of antimicrobial agents [219]. Thus, it is important to obtain AMPs that can diffuse into 
biofilms and kill biofilm cells. Recently a synthetic peptide, (RW)4D dendrimer [220] was 
demonstrated to inhibit planktonic growth and biofilm formation of E. coli dose dependently. This 
AMP inhibited biofilm formation by 93.5% at 40 µM. This dendrimer did not detach preformed 
biofilms, but was able to kill most of the cells residing in mature biofilms dose dependently [221]. 
Later, (RW)n-NH2 based AMPs with different chain length (where n = 2, 3, and 4) were compared for 
their effects on E. coli RP437 biofilms. The chain length was found to be important to the activity of 
these peptides. Longer peptides, (RW)3-NH2 and (RW)4-NH2, showed significant inhibition of 
planktonic growth (36% reduction in growth rate) while a shorter peptides (RW)2-NH2 did not cause a 
clear inhibition at concentrations up to 200 µM. This length-activity relation was also found for 
biofilm inhibition. E. coli biofilm surface coverage and the viability of biofilm cells were reduced 
significantly by the longer peptides (95% inhibition of biofilm growth by 200 µM (RW)3-NH2 and 
84.4% inhibition of biofilm growth by 200 µM (RW)4-NH2). Preformed biofilms were also tested with 
these peptides. However, the treatment of preformed biofilms with these peptides did not show the 
same length-activity relationship. Interestingly, 200 µM (RW)3-NH2 showed significant killing of 
biofilm cells while 200 µM (RW)4-NH2 showed strong biofilm dispersion (91.5% reduction in biofilm 
surface coverage at 200 µM) with no apparent killing effect on biofilm cells. Although 200 µM  
(RW)4-NH2 did not kill biofilm cells directly, the detached biofilm cells were killed by this  
peptide effectively [222]. 
AMPs have also been tested against the biofilms of drug resistant bacteria. In a study by  
Okuda et al. [223], nisin A and lacticin Q were tested against mature biofilms of a MRSA strain,  
S. aureus MR23. Nisin A at 40 µM was found to kill more than 95% biofilm cells while lacticin Q at 
80 µM killed around 90% of the biofilm cells. In another study, GL13K derived from human parotid 
secretory protein (PSP) killed 99.9% of 24 hour biofilm cells of P. aeruginosa when it was added at  
100 µg/mL for a two hour treatment [224]. 
NRC-16, a synthetic peptide, was tested against biofilm formation of three P. aeruginosa strains 
and compared with antibiotics such as ampicillin, chloramphenicol, and ciprofloxacin. NRC-16 
showed biofilm inhibition at 8 µg/mL, which is 64 fold less than the antibiotic concentrations required 
to kill these P. aeruginosa strains [225]. 
There are also some AMPs that can sensitize biofilm cells to other antimicrobial agents.  
For example, lactoferrin does not kill S. epidermidis or affect its growth. However treatment of  
S. epidermidis biofilms on contact lenses with lactoferrin and vancomycin together showed a 2 fold 
decrease in both MBC (minimal bactericidal concentration) and MIC of biofilm cells compared to the 
treatment with vancomycin alone [226]. 
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1558 
 
 
5.2. Persister Control 
Persisters cells can be found in almost any microbial populations. These cells are dormant 
phenotypic variants and are highly tolerant to antibiotics [227]. However, membrane integrity is 
essential for the survival of bacteria irrespective of the metabolic stage of the cell and cell membrane is 
a major target of AMPs. Thus, AMPs may have good potential to kill persister cells. In a recent study, 
a synthetic cationic peptide, (RW)4-NH2, was found to kill more than 99% of E. coli HM22 persister 
cells in planktonic culture. Besides, this synthetic peptide reduced the number of persister cells in 
mature biofilms by up to 98% at 40 µM. More interestingly, the combination of this peptide with 
oflaxacin (5 µg/mL) resulted in complete eradication of viable cells in E. coli HM22 biofilms 
including persister cells [228]. Thus, the combination of conventional antibiotics with AMPs may offer 
a synergy to control drug tolerant infections. 
6. Resistance to Antimicrobial Peptides 
There are mainly two different types of resistance mechanisms against AMPs: constitutive 
resistance and inducible resistance [229]. The inducible resistance mechanisms include substitution [230], 
modification [231], and acylation [232] of the membrane molecules, activation of some proteolytic 
enzymes [233] and efflux pumps [234], and modifications of intracellular targets [235]. The constitutive 
resistance mechanisms include electrostatic shielding [236], changes in membrane potential during 
different stages of cell growth [237], and biofilm formation [229]. These resistance mechanisms are 
illustrated in Figure 3. 
For example the activity of some AMPs against S. aureus can be inhibited by adhesin molecules on 
the cell surface of this bacterium. These adhesin molecules are polymeric substances and stay on the 
cell surface after secretion [238]. Since adhesin is a positively charged polymer, it can form a repulsive 
barrier against positively charged AMPs. Salmonella typhimurium also has a membrane bound lipid A 
modification system, which defends themselves against AMPs from the host [239]. In this system, 
PhoQ is a membrane bound sensor kinase and PhoP is intracellular response regulator. PhoQ is 
activated in the presence of high level positive charges outside the cells. It then phosphorylates the 
PhoP causing up-regulation of some genes including those related to AMP resistance. This system is 
not active when the extracellular level of Ca2+, Mg2+, or Mn2+ ions is low since divalent cations 
interact with PhoQ and change its conformation [63]. 
Although bacteria have diverse mechanisms for resistance to AMPs, it is encouraging to notice that 
the general lipid bilayer structure of bacterial membranes makes it hard to develop a complete 
resistance against AMPs. Also, the resistance against AMPs reported to date is not as strong as those 
against antibiotics and it only covers a limited number of AMPs. 
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1559 
 
 
Figure 3. Schematic representation of AMP resistance mechanisms. (A) Gram-positive 
bacteria resist AMPs via teichoic acid modification of LPS molecules and L-lysine 
modification of phospholipids. (B) Gram-negative bacteria resist AMPs by modifying LPS 
molecules with aminoarabinose or acylation of Lipid A unit of LPS molecules.  
(C) Bacteria express some positively charged proteins and integrate them in the membrane 
so positive charges repulse each other and bacteria can resist such AMPs. (D) Bacteria 
produce negatively charged proteins and secrete them into extracellular environment to 
bind and block AMPs. (E) The intracellular AMPs are extruded by efflux pumps. (F) The 
AMPs inside the cell are degraded by proteases. 
 
7. Conclusions 
The urgent need to obtain new antimicrobials has been driving AMP research. With rapid growth in 
related knowledge and lead compounds, more AMPs may enter clinical tests and treatment in the near 
feature. However, infection control by AMP is still hindered by several challenges including low 
specificity, high manufacturer cost, potential toxicity to animal cells, and lack of a robust guideline for 
rational design. 
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1560 
 
 
As we have seen from synthetic and modified AMP studies, it is easy to change characteristics of an 
AMP with even small modifications. However, predicting the results of these changes is still challenging. 
Thus, there is a need to understand the effects of structural modifications on the physiochemical 
characteristics of AMPs as well as their target spectrum and activity. Recently, these types of studies 
have been increasing and computational approaches have been involved in AMP research. These 
efforts will help to better understand the mode of action of AMPs and predict their activities. 
Another understudied area is using AMPs to control antibiotic resistant bacteria, biofilms, and 
persisters. These targets are highly resistant to traditional antibiotics and play important roles in 
infections. Since AMPs target cell membrane, they have good potential in such applications. On the 
other hand, because AMPs have not been well studied for biofilm and persister control, there might be 
some existing natural AMPs that are effective against these targets with potential synergy with 
antibiotics. Applying AMPs with biofilm matrix degrading enzymes might also be a good strategy to 
eliminate biofilms. Further development in this area and AMP research in general will benefit from 
close collaboration of different disciplines and new tools that can decipher the structure-function 
relationship and more efficiently synthesize and modify AMP molecules. 
Acknowledgments 
Part of the ongoing research on biofilms and persister cells in the authors’ laboratory is supported 
by the U.S. National Science Foundation (CAREER-1055644 and EFRI-1137186). 
Conflicts of Interest 
The authors declare no conflict of interest. 
References 
1. 
Brown, K.L.; Hancock, R.E. Cationic host defense (antimicrobial) peptides. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 
2006, 18, 24–30. 
2. 
Harris, F.; Dennison, S.R.; Phoenix, D.A. Anionic antimicrobial peptides from eukaryotic 
organisms. Curr. Protein Pept. Sci. 2009, 10, 585–606. 
3. 
Groenink, J.; Walgreen-Weterings, E.; van’t Hof, W.; Veerman, E.C.; Nieuw Amerongen, A.V. 
Cationic amphipathic peptides, derived from bovine and human lactoferrins, with antimicrobial 
activity against oral pathogens. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 1999, 179, 217–222. 
4. 
Bradshaw, J. Cationic antimicrobial peptides: Issues for potential clinical use. BioDrugs 2003, 
17, 233–240. 
5. 
Riedl, S.; Zweytick, D.; Lohner, K. Membrane-active host defense peptides—challenges and 
perspectives for the development of novel anticancer drugs. Chem. Phys. Lipids 2011, 164, 766–781. 
6. 
Huang, Y.B.; Huang, J.F.; Chen, Y.X. Alpha-helical cationic antimicrobial peptides: Relationships 
of structure and function. Protein Cell 2010, 1, 143–152. 
7. 
Dubos, R.J. Studies on a bactericidal agent extracted from a soil bacillus: I. Preparation of the 
agent. Its activity in vitro. J. Exp. Med. 1939, 70, 1–10. 
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1561 
 
 
8. 
Dubos, R.J. Studies on a bactericidal agent extracted from a soil bacillus: II. Protective effect of 
the bactericidal agent against experimental Pneumococcus infections in mice. J. Exp. Med. 1939, 
70, 11–17. 
9. 
Hotchkiss, R.D.; Dubos, R.J. Fractionation of the bactericidal agent from cultures of a soil 
Bacillus. J. Biol. Chem. 1940, 132, 791–792. 
10. Van Epps, H.L. Rene dubos: Unearthing antibiotics. J. Exp. Med. 2006, 203, 259. 
11. Dubos, R.J.; Hotchkiss, R.D. The production of bactericidal substances by aerobic sporulating 
bacilli. J. Exp. Med. 1941, 73, 629–640. 
12. Rammelkamp, C.H.; Weinstein, L. Toxic effects of tyrothricin, gramicidin and tyrocidine.  
J. Infect. Dis. 1942, 71, 166–173. 
13. Balls, A.K. A crystalline protein obtained from a lipoprotein of wheat flour. Cereal Chem. 1942, 
19, 279–288. 
14. Ohtani, S.; Okada, T.; Yoshizumi, H.; Kagamiyama, H. Complete primary structures of two 
subunits of purothionin a, a lethal protein for brewer’s yeast from wheat flour. J. Biochem. 1977, 
82, 753–767. 
15. Hirsch, J.G. Phagocytin: A bactericidal substance from polymorphonuclear leucocytes. J. Exp. Med. 
1956, 103, 589–611. 
16. Kiss, G.; Michl, H. Uber das giftsekret der gelbbauchunke, Bombina variegata L. Toxicon 1962, 
1, 33–34. 
17. Groves, M.L.; Peterson, R.F.; Kiddy, C.A. Poliomorphism in the red protein isolated from milk 
of individual cows. Nature 1965, 207, 1007–1008. 
18. Zeya, H.I.; Spitznagel, J.K. Antibacterial and enzymic basic proteins from leukocyte lysosomes: 
Separation and identification. Science 1963, 142, 1085–1087. 
19. Zhao, X.; Wu, H.; Lu, H.; Li, G.; Huang, Q. Lamp: A database linking antimicrobial peptides. 
PLoS One 2013, 8, e66557. 
20. Conlon, J.M.; Sonnevend, A. Antimicrobial peptides in frog skin secretions. Methods Mol. Biol. 
2010, 618, 3–14. 
21. Radek, K.; Gallo, R. Antimicrobial peptides: Natural effectors of the innate immune system. 
Semin. Immunopathol. 2007, 29, 27–43. 
22. Peters, B.M.; Shirtliff, M.E.; Jabra-Rizk, M.A. Antimicrobial peptides: Primeval molecules or 
future drugs? PLoS Pathog. 2010, 6, e1001067. 
23. Leippe, M. Antimicrobial and cytolytic polypeptides of amoeboid protozoa—Effector molecules 
of primitive phagocytes. Dev. Comp. Immunol. 1999, 23, 267–279. 
24. Zasloff, M. Antimicrobial peptides of multicellular organisms. Nature 2002, 415, 389–395. 
25. Schauber, J.; Gallo, R.L. Antimicrobial peptides and the skin immune defense system. J. Allergy 
Clin. Immunol. 2008, 122, 261–266. 
26. Ma, Y.F.; Liu, C.B.; Liu, X.H.; Wu, J.; Yang, H.L.; Wang, Y.P.; Li, J.X.; Yu, H.N.; Lai, R. 
Peptidomics and genomics analysis of novel antimicrobial peptides from the frog, Rana nigrovittata. 
Genomics 2010, 95, 66–71. 
27. Hultmark, D.; Steiner, H.; Rasmuson, T.; Boman, H.G. Insect immunity. Purification and 
properties of three inducible bactericidal proteins from hemolymph of immunized pupae of 
Hyalophora cecropia. Eur. J. Biochem. 1980, 106, 7–16. 
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1562 
 
 
28. Bals, R.; Wang, X.; Meegalla, R.L.; Wattler, S.; Weiner, D.J.; Nehls, M.C.; Wilson, J.M.  
Mouse beta-defensin 3 is an inducible antimicrobial peptide expressed in the epithelia of multiple 
organs. Infect. Immun. 1999, 67, 3542–3547. 
29. Ganz, T. The role of antimicrobial peptides in innate immunity. Integr. Comp. Biol. 2003, 43, 
300–304. 
30. Niyonsaba, F.; Iwabuchi, K.; Matsuda, H.; Ogawa, H.; Nagaoka, I. Epithelial cell-derived human 
beta-defensin-2 acts as a chemotaxin for mast cells through a pertussis toxin-sensitive and 
phospholipase c-dependent pathway. Int. Immunol. 2002, 14, 421–426. 
31. Hancock, R.E.; Scott, M.G. The role of antimicrobial peptides in animal defenses. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA 2000, 97, 8856–8861. 
32. Oppenheim, J.J.; Biragyn, A.; Kwak, L.W.; Yang, D. Roles of antimicrobial peptides such as 
defensins in innate and adaptive immunity. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 2003, 62, ii17–ii21. 
33. Scott, M.G.; Rosenberger, C.M.; Gold, M.R.; Finlay, B.B.; Hancock, R.E. An alpha-helical 
cationic antimicrobial peptide selectively modulates macrophage responses to lipopolysaccharide 
and directly alters macrophage gene expression. J. Immunol. 2000, 165, 3358–3365. 
34. Nijnik, A.; Pistolic, J.; Filewod, N.C.; Hancock, R.E. Signaling pathways mediating chemokine 
induction in keratinocytes by cathelicidin ll-37 and flagellin. J. Innate Immun. 2012, 4, 377–386. 
35. Kindrachuk, J.; Jenssen, H.; Elliott, M.; Nijnik, A.; Magrangeas-Janot, L.; Pasupuleti, M.; 
Thorson, L.; Ma, S.; Easton, D.M.; Bains, M.; et al. Manipulation of innate immunity by a 
bacterial secreted peptide: Lantibiotic nisin z is selectively immunomodulatory. Innate Immun. 
2013, 19, 315–327. 
36. Birchler, T.; Seibl, R.; Buchner, K.; Loeliger, S.; Seger, R.; Hossle, J.P.; Aguzzi, A.; Lauener, R.P. 
Human toll-like receptor 2 mediates induction of the antimicrobial peptide human beta-defensin 
2 in response to bacterial lipoprotein. Eur. J. Immunol. 2001, 31, 3131–3137. 
37. Larrick, J.W.; Hirata, M.; Balint, R.F.; Lee, J.; Zhong, J.; Wright, S.C. Human cap18: A novel 
antimicrobial lipopolysaccharide-binding protein. Infect. Immun. 1995, 63, 1291–1297. 
38. Brackett, D.J.; Lerner, M.R.; Lacquement, M.A.; He, R.; Pereira, H.A. A synthetic 
lipopolysaccharide-binding peptide based on the neutrophil-derived protein cap37 prevents 
endotoxin-induced responses in conscious rats. Infect. Immun. 1997, 65, 2803–2811. 
39. Zhang, G.H.; Mann, D.M.; Tsai, C.M. Neutralization of endotoxin in vitro and in vivo by a 
human lactoferrin-derived peptide. Infect. Immun. 1999, 67, 1353–1358. 
40. Loppnow, H.; Libby, P.; Freudenberg, M.; Krauss, J.H.; Weckesser, J.; Mayer, H. Cytokine 
induction by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) corresponds to lethal toxicity and is inhibited by nontoxic 
Rhodobacter capsulatus LPS. Infect. Immun. 1990, 58, 3743–3750. 
41. Powers, J.P.; Hancock, R.E. The relationship between peptide structure and antibacterial activity. 
Peptides 2003, 24, 1681–1691. 
42. Bulet, P.; Stocklin, R.; Menin, L. Anti-microbial peptides: From invertebrates to vertebrates. 
Immunol. Rev. 2004, 198, 169–184. 
43. McManus, A.M.; Dawson, N.F.; Wade, J.D.; Carrington, L.E.; Winzor, D.J.; Craik, D.J.  
Three-dimensional structure of rk-1: A novel alpha-defensin peptide. Biochemistry 2000, 39, 
15757–15764. 
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1563 
 
 
44. Uteng, M.; Hauge, H.H.; Markwick, P.R.; Fimland, G.; Mantzilas, D.; Nissen-Meyer, J.;  
Muhle-Goll, C. Three-dimensional structure in lipid micelles of the pediocin-like antimicrobial 
peptide sakacin p and a sakacin p variant that is structurally stabilized by an inserted c-terminal 
disulfide bridge. Biochemistry 2003, 42, 11417–11426. 
45. Rozek, A.; Friedrich, C.L.; Hancock, R.E. Structure of the bovine antimicrobial peptide 
indolicidin bound to dodecylphosphocholine and sodium dodecyl sulfate micelles. Biochemistry 
2000, 39, 15765–15774. 
46. Hsu, C.H.; Chen, C.; Jou, M.L.; Lee, A.Y.; Lin, Y.C.; Yu, Y.P.; Huang, W.T.; Wu, S.H. 
Structural and DNA-binding studies on the bovine antimicrobial peptide, indolicidin: Evidence 
for multiple conformations involved in binding to membranes and DNA. Nucleic Acids Res. 
2005, 33, 4053–4064. 
47. Jenssen, H.; Hamill, P.; Hancock, R.E.W. Peptide antimicrobial agents. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 
2006, 19, 491–511. 
48. Loeffler, J.M.; Nelson, D.; Fischetti, V.A. Rapid killing of Streptococcus pneumoniae with a 
bacteriophage cell wall hydrolase. Science 2001, 294, 2170–2172. 
49. Naghmouchi, K.; le Lay, C.; Baah, J.; Drider, D. Antibiotic and antimicrobial peptide 
combinations: Synergistic inhibition of Pseudomonas fluorescens and antibiotic-resistant variants. 
Res. Microbiol. 2012, 163, 101–108. 
50. Costa, F.; Carvalho, I.F.; Montelaro, R.C.; Gomes, P.; Martins, M.C. Covalent immobilization of 
antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) onto biomaterial surfaces. Acta Biomater. 2011, 7, 1431–1440. 
51. Wade, J.D.; Lin, F.; Hossain, M.A.; Dawson, R.M. Chemical synthesis and biological evaluation 
of an antimicrobial peptide gonococcal growth inhibitor. Amino Acids 2012, 43, 2279–2283. 
52. Piers, K.L.; Brown, M.H.; Hancock, R.E. Recombinant DNA procedures for producing small 
antimicrobial cationic peptides in bacteria. Gene 1993, 134, 7–13. 
53. Ramos, R.; Moreira, S.; Rodrigues, A.; Gama, M.; Domingues, L. Recombinant expression and 
purification of the antimicrobial peptide magainin-2. Biotechnol. Prog. 2013, 29, 17–22. 
54. Papo, N.; Oren, Z.; Pag, U.; Sahl, H.G.; Shai, Y. The consequence of sequence alteration of an 
amphipathic alpha-helical antimicrobial peptide and its diastereomers. J. Biol. Chem. 2002, 277, 
33913–33921. 
55. Pacor, S.; Giangaspero, A.; Bacac, M.; Sava, G.; Tossi, A. Analysis of the cytotoxicity of synthetic 
antimicrobial peptides on mouse leucocytes: Implications for systemic use. J. Antimicrob. 
Chemother. 2002, 50, 339–348. 
56. Matsuzaki, K. Control of cell selectivity of antimicrobial peptides. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2009, 
1788, 1687–1692. 
57. Sieprawska-Lupa, M.; Mydel, P.; Krawczyk, K.; Wojcik, K.; Puklo, M.; Lupa, B.; Suder, P.; 
Silberring, J.; Reed, M.; Pohl, J.; et al. Degradation of human antimicrobial peptide ll-37 by 
Staphylococcus aureus-derived proteinases. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 2004, 48, 4673–4679. 
58. Svenson, J.; Stensen, W.; Brandsdal, B.O.; Haug, B.E.; Monrad, J.; Svendsen, J.S. Antimicrobial 
peptides with stability toward tryptic degradation. Biochemistry 2008, 47, 3777–3788. 
59. Eckert, R.; Qi, F.; Yarbrough, D.K.; He, J.; Anderson, M.H.; Shi, W. Adding selectivity to 
antimicrobial peptides: Rational design of a multidomain peptide against Pseudomonas spp. 
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 2006, 50, 1480–1488. 
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1564 
 
 
60. Bommarius, B.; Jenssen, H.; Elliott, M.; Kindrachuk, J.; Pasupuleti, M.; Gieren, H.; Jaeger, K.E.; 
Hancock, R.E.; Kalman, D. Cost-effective expression and purification of antimicrobial and host 
defense peptides in Escherichia coli. Peptides 2010, 31, 1957–1965. 
61. Duquesne, S.; Destoumieux-Garzon, D.; Zirah, S.; Knappe, T.A.; Goulard, C.; Peduzzi, J.; 
Marahiel, M.A.; Rebuffat, S. Post-translational modification and folding of a lasso-type  
gene-encoded antimicrobial peptide require two enzymes only in Escherichia coli. Adv. Exp. 
Med. Biol. 2009, 611, 35–36. 
62. Bagheri, M.; Beyermann, M.; Dathe, M. Immobilization reduces the activity of surface-bound 
cationic antimicrobial peptides with no influence upon the activity spectrum. Antimicrob. Agents 
Chemother. 2009, 53, 1132–1141. 
63. Bader, M.W.; Sanowar, S.; Daley, M.E.; Schneider, A.R.; Cho, U.; Xu, W.; Klevit, R.E.; Le 
Moual, H.; Miller, S.I. Recognition of antimicrobial peptides by a bacterial sensor kinase. Cell 
2005, 122, 461–472. 
64. Marr, A.K.; Gooderham, W.J.; Hancock, R.E. Antibacterial peptides for therapeutic use: 
Obstacles and realistic outlook. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 2006, 6, 468–472. 
65. Phoenix, D.; Dennison, S.R.; Harris, F. Antimicrobial Peptides; Wiley-VCH: Weinheim, 
Germany, 2013; p. 231. 
66. Kirby, A.J. The lysozyme mechanism sorted—After 50 years. Nat. Struct. Biol. 2001, 8, 737–739. 
67. Bastian, A.; Schafer, H. Human alpha-defensin 1 (hnp-1) inhibits adenoviral infection in vitro. 
Regul. Pept. 2001, 101, 157–161. 
68. Horne, W.S.; Wiethoff, C.M.; Cui, C.; Wilcoxen, K.M.; Amorin, M.; Ghadiri, M.R.; Nemerow, G.R. 
Antiviral cyclic D,L-α-peptides: Targeting a general biochemical pathway in virus infections. 
Bioorg. Med. Chem. 2005, 13, 5145–5153. 
69. Robinson, W.E., Jr.; McDougall, B.; Tran, D.; Selsted, M.E. Anti-hiv-1 activity of indolicidin,  
an antimicrobial peptide from neutrophils. J. Leukoc. Biol. 1998, 63, 94–100. 
70. Sitaram, N.; Nagaraj, R. Interaction of antimicrobial peptides with biological and model 
membranes: Structural and charge requirements for activity. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1999, 1462, 
29–54. 
71. Belaid, A.; Aouni, M.; Khelifa, R.; Trabelsi, A.; Jemmali, M.; Hani, K. In vitro antiviral activity 
of dermaseptins against herpes simplex virus type 1. J. Med. Virol. 2002, 66, 229–234. 
72. Yasin, B.; Wang, W.; Pang, M.; Cheshenko, N.; Hong, T.; Waring, A.J.; Herold, B.C.; Wagar, E.A.; 
Lehrer, R.I. Theta defensins protect cells from infection by herpes simplex virus by inhibiting 
viral adhesion and entry. J. Virol. 2004, 78, 5147–5156. 
73. Tamamura, H.; Ishihara, T.; Otaka, A.; Murakami, T.; Ibuka, T.; Waki, M.; Matsumoto, A.; 
Yamamoto, N.; Fujii, N. Analysis of the interaction of an anti-hiv peptide, t22 ([tyr5, 12, lys7]-
polyphemusin ii), with gp120 and cd4 by surface plasmon resonance. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
1996, 1298, 37–44. 
74. Song, B.H.; Lee, G.C.; Moon, M.S.; Cho, Y.H.; Lee, C.H. Human cytomegalovirus binding to 
heparan sulfate proteoglycans on the cell surface and/or entry stimulates the expression of human 
leukocyte antigen class I. J. Gen. Virol. 2001, 82, 2405–2413. 
75. WuDunn, D.; Spear, P.G. Initial interaction of herpes simplex virus with cells is binding to 
heparan sulfate. J. Virol. 1989, 63, 52–58. 
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1565 
 
 
76. Laquerre, S.; Argnani, R.; Anderson, D.B.; Zucchini, S.; Manservigi, R.; Glorioso, J.C. Heparan 
sulfate proteoglycan binding by herpes simplex virus type 1 glycoproteins b and c, which differ 
in their contributions to virus attachment, penetration, and cell-to-cell spread. J. Virol. 1998, 72, 
6119–6130. 
77. Andersen, J.H.; Jenssen, H.; Sandvik, K.; Gutteberg, T.J. Anti-hsv activity of lactoferrin and 
lactoferricin is dependent on the presence of heparan sulphate at the cell surface. J. Med. Virol. 
2004, 74, 262–271. 
78. Jenssen, H.; Andersen, J.H.; Uhlin-Hansen, L.; Gutteberg, T.J.; Rekdal, O. Anti-hsv activity of 
lactoferricin analogues is only partly related to their affinity for heparan sulfate. Antiviral Res. 
2004, 61, 101–109. 
79. Liu, Y.; Gong, W.; Huang, C.C.; Herr, W.; Cheng, X. Crystal structure of the conserved core of 
the herpes simplex virus transcriptional regulatory protein vp16. Genes Dev. 1999, 13, 1692–1703. 
80. Sinha, S.; Cheshenko, N.; Lehrer, R.I.; Herold, B.C. Np-1, a rabbit alpha-defensin, prevents the 
entry and intercellular spread of herpes simplex virus type 2. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 
2003, 47, 494–500. 
81. 
Shai, Y. Mode of action of membrane active antimicrobial peptides. Biopolymers 2002, 66, 236–248. 
82. Zhang, L.; Rozek, A.; Hancock, R.E. Interaction of cationic antimicrobial peptides with model 
membranes. J. Biol. Chem. 2001, 276, 35714–35722. 
83. Brogden, K.A. Antimicrobial peptides: Pore formers or metabolic inhibitors in bacteria?  
Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2005, 3, 238–250. 
84. Park, C.B.; Kim, H.S.; Kim, S.C. Mechanism of action of the antimicrobial peptide buforin ii: 
Buforin ii kills microorganisms by penetrating the cell membrane and inhibiting cellular 
functions. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 1998, 244, 253–257. 
85. Otvos, L.; O, I.; Rogers, M.E.; Consolvo, P.J.; Condie, B.A.; Lovas, S.; Bulet, P.;  
Blaszczyk-Thurin, M. Interaction between heat shock proteins and antimicrobial peptides. 
Biochemistry 2000, 39, 14150–14159. 
86. Kragol, G.; Lovas, S.; Varadi, G.; Condie, B.A.; Hoffmann, R.; Otvos, L. The antibacterial 
peptide pyrrhocoricin inhibits the ATPase actions of DnaK and prevents chaperone-assisted 
protein folding. Biochemistry 2001, 40, 3016–3026. 
87. Brumfitt, W.; Salton, M.R.; Hamilton-Miller, J.M. Nisin, alone and combined with 
peptidoglycan-modulating antibiotics: Activity against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus and vancomycin-resistant enterococci. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 2002, 50, 731–734. 
88. De Lucca, A.J.; Bland, J.M.; Jacks, T.J.; Grimm, C.; Walsh, T.J. Fungicidal and binding 
properties of the natural peptides cecropin b and dermaseptin. Med. Mycol. 1998, 36, 291–298. 
89. De Lucca, A.J.; Walsh, T.J. Antifungal peptides: Novel therapeutic compounds against emerging 
pathogens. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 1999, 43, 1–11. 
90. Lee, Y.T.; Kim, D.H.; Suh, J.Y.; Chung, J.H.; Lee, B.L.; Lee, Y.; Choi, S. Structural 
characteristics of tenecin 3, an insect antifungal protein. Biochem. Mol. Biol. Int. 1999, 47, 369–376. 
91. Yokoyama, S.; Iida, Y.; Kawasaki, Y.; Minami, Y.; Watanabe, K.; Yagi, F. The chitin-binding 
capability of cy-amp1 from cycad is essential to antifungal activity. J. Pept. Sci. 2009, 15, 492–497. 
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1566 
 
 
92. Pushpanathan, M.; Rajendhran, J.; Jayashree, S.; Sundarakrishnan, B.; Jayachandran, S.; 
Gunasekaran, P. Identification of a novel antifungal peptide with chitin-binding property from 
marine metagenome. Protein Pept. Lett. 2012, 19, 1289–1296. 
93. Fujimura, M.; Ideguchi, M.; Minami, Y.; Watanabe, K.; Tadera, K. Purification, characterization, 
and sequencing of novel antimicrobial peptides, Tu-AMP 1 and Tu-AMP 2, from bulbs of tulip 
(Tulipa gesneriana L.). Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem. 2004, 68, 571–577. 
94. Lehrer, R.I.; Szklarek, D.; Ganz, T.; Selsted, M.E. Correlation of binding of rabbit granulocyte 
peptides to Candida albicans with candidacidal activity. Infect. Immun. 1985, 49, 207–211. 
95. Terras, F.R.; Schoofs, H.M.; De Bolle, M.F.; Van Leuven, F.; Rees, S.B.; Vanderleyden, J.; 
Cammue, B.P.; Broekaert, W.F. Analysis of two novel classes of plant antifungal proteins from 
radish (Raphanus sativus L.) seeds. J. Biol. Chem. 1992, 267, 15301–15309. 
96. Van der Weerden, N.L.; Hancock, R.E.; Anderson, M.A. Permeabilization of fungal hyphae by 
the plant defensin nad1 occurs through a cell wall-dependent process. J. Biol. Chem. 2010, 285, 
37513–37520. 
97. Moerman, L.; Bosteels, S.; Noppe, W.; Willems, J.; Clynen, E.; Schoofs, L.; Thevissen, K.; 
Tytgat, J.; Van Eldere, J.; van der Walt, J.; et al. Antibacterial and antifungal properties of α-helical, 
cationic peptides in the venom of scorpions from southern Africa. Eur. J. Biochem. 2002, 269, 
4799–4810. 
98. Jiang, Z.; Vasil, A.I.; Hale, J.D.; Hancock, R.E.; Vasil, M.L.; Hodges, R.S. Effects of net charge 
and the number of positively charged residues on the biological activity of amphipathic  
alpha-helical cationic antimicrobial peptides. Biopolymers 2008, 90, 369–383. 
99. Lee, D.G.; Hahm, K.S.; Shin, S.Y. Structure and fungicidal activity of a synthetic antimicrobial 
peptide, p18, and its truncated peptides. Biotechnol. Lett. 2004, 26, 337–341. 
100. Lee, D.G.; Kim, H.K.; Kim, S.A.; Park, Y.; Park, S.C.; Jang, S.H.; Hahm, K.S. Fungicidal effect 
of indolicidin and its interaction with phospholipid membranes. Biochem. Bioph. Res. Co. 2003, 
305, 305–310. 
101. Barbault, F.; Landon, C.; Guenneugues, M.; Meyer, J.P.; Schott, V.; Dimarcq, J.L.; Vovelle, F. 
Solution structure of alo-3: A new knottin-type antifungal peptide from the insect Acrocinus 
longimanus. Biochemistry 2003, 42, 14434–14442. 
102. Zasloff, M. Magainins, a class of antimicrobial peptides from Xenopus skin: Isolation, 
characterization of two active forms, and partial cDNA sequence of a precursor. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA 1987, 84, 5449–5453. 
103. Alberola, J.; Rodriguez, A.; Francino, O.; Roura, X.; Rivas, L.; Andreu, D. Safety and efficacy of 
antimicrobial peptides against naturally acquired leishmaniasis. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 
2004, 48, 641–643. 
104. Park, Y.; Jang, S.H.; Lee, D.G.; Hahm, K.S. Antinematodal effect of antimicrobial peptide, 
pmap-23, isolated from porcine myeloid against Caenorhabditis elegans. J. Pept. Sci. 2004, 10, 
304–311. 
105. Brogden, K.A.; Ackermann, M.; Huttner, K.M. Small, anionic, and charge-neutralizing 
propeptide fragments of zymogens are antimicrobial. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 1997, 41, 
1615–1617. 
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1567 
 
 
106. Lai, R.; Liu, H.; Lee, W.H.; Zhang, Y. An anionic antimicrobial peptide from toad Bombina 
maxima. Biochem. Bioph. Res. Co. 2002, 295, 796–799. 
107. Steffen, H.; Rieg, S.; Wiedemann, I.; Kalbacher, H.; Deeg, M.; Sahl, H.G.; Peschel, A.; Gotz, F.; 
Garbe, C.; Schittek, B. Naturally processed dermcidin-derived peptides do not permeabilize 
bacterial membranes and kill microorganisms irrespective of their charge. Antimicrob. Agents 
Chemother. 2006, 50, 2608–2620. 
108. Selsted, M.E.; Novotny, M.J.; Morris, W.L.; Tang, Y.Q.; Smith, W.; Cullor, J.S. Indolicidin, a 
novel bactericidal tridecapeptide amide from neutrophils. J. Biol. Chem. 1992, 267, 4292–4295. 
109. Subbalakshmi, C.; Sitaram, N. Mechanism of antimicrobial action of indolicidin. FEMS 
Microbiol. Lett. 1998, 160, 91–96. 
110. Krajewski, K.; Marchand, C.; Long, Y.Q.; Pommier, Y.; Roller, P.P. Synthesis and hiv-1 integrase 
inhibitory activity of dimeric and tetrameric analogs of indolicidin. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 
2004, 14, 5595–5598. 
111. Lee, D.G.; Kim, P.I.; Park, Y.K.; Woo, E.R.; Choi, J.S.; Choi, C.H.; Hahm, K.S. Design of novel 
peptide analogs with potent fungicidal activity, based on pmap-23 antimicrobial peptide isolated 
from porcine myeloid. Biochem. Bioph. Res. Co. 2002, 293, 231–238. 
112. Zhang, Y.M.; Rock, C.O. Transcriptional regulation in bacterial membrane lipid synthesis.  
J. Lipid Res. 2009, 50, S115–S119. 
113. He, K.; Ludtke, S.J.; Worcester, D.L.; Huang, H.W. Neutron scattering in the plane of 
membranes: Structure of alamethicin pores. Biophys. J. 1996, 70, 2659–2666. 
114. Madani, F.; Lindberg, S.; Langel, U.; Futaki, S.; Graslund, A. Mechanisms of cellular uptake of 
cell-penetrating peptides. J. Biophys. 2011, 2011, 414729. 
115. Pouny, Y.; Rapaport, D.; Mor, A.; Nicolas, P.; Shai, Y. Interaction of antimicrobial dermaseptin 
and its fluorescently labeled analogues with phospholipid membranes. Biochemistry 1992, 31, 
12416–12423. 
116. Bechinger, B. Detergent-like properties of magainin antibiotic peptides: A 31p solid-state nmr 
spectroscopy study. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2005, 1712, 101–108. 
117. Bolintineanu, D.S.; Kaznessis, Y.N. Computational studies of protegrin antimicrobial peptides: A 
review. Peptides 2011, 32, 188–201. 
118. Mecke, A.; Lee, D.K.; Ramamoorthy, A.; Orr, B.G.; Holl, M.M.B. Membrane thinning due to 
antimicrobial peptide binding: An atomic force microscopy study of msi-78 in lipid bilayers. 
Biophys. J. 2005, 89, 4043–4050. 
119. Ludtke, S.; He, K.; Huang, H. Membrane thinning caused by magainin 2. Biochemistry 1995, 34, 
16764–16769. 
120. Chen, F.Y.; Lee, M.T.; Huang, H.W. Evidence for membrane thinning effect as the mechanism 
for peptide-induced pore formation. Biophys. J. 2003, 84, 3751–3758. 
121. Matsuzaki, K.; Murase, O.; Fujii, N.; Miyajima, K. An antimicrobial peptide, magainin 2, 
induced rapid flip-flop of phospholipids coupled with pore formation and peptide translocation. 
Biochemistry 1996, 35, 11361–11368. 
122. Matsuzaki, K. Magainins as paradigm for the mode of action of pore forming polypeptides. 
Biochim. Biophys. Acta Biomembr. 1998, 1376, 391–400. 
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1568 
 
 
123. Wu, M.; Maier, E.; Benz, R.; Hancock, R.E. Mechanism of interaction of different classes of 
cationic antimicrobial peptides with planar bilayers and with the cytoplasmic membrane of 
Escherichia coli. Biochemistry 1999, 38, 7235–7242. 
124. Ehrenstein, G.; Lecar, H. Electrically gated ionic channels in lipid bilayers. Q. Rev. Biophys. 
1977, 10, 1–34. 
125. Shimazaki, K.; Tazume, T.; Uji, K.; Tanaka, M.; Kumura, H.; Mikawa, K.; Shimo-Oka, T. 
Properties of a heparin-binding peptide derived from bovine lactoferrin. J. Dairy. Sci. 1998, 81, 
2841–2849. 
126. Cudic, M.; Otvos, L. Intracellular targets of antibacterial peptides. Curr. Drug Targets 2002, 3, 
101–106. 
127. Otvos, L. Antibacterial peptides and proteins with multiple cellular targets. J. Pept. Sci. 2005, 11, 
697–706. 
128. Mookherjee, N.; Lippert, D.N.; Hamill, P.; Falsafi, R.; Nijnik, A.; Kindrachuk, J.; Pistolic, J.; 
Gardy, J.; Miri, P.; Naseer, M.; et al. Intracellular receptor for human host defense peptide ll-37 
in monocytes. J. Immunol. 2009, 183, 2688–2696. 
129. Chen, L.; Harrison, S.D. Cell-penetrating peptides in drug development: Enabling intracellular 
targets. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 2007, 35, 821–825. 
130. Marchand, C.; Krajewski, K.; Lee, H.F.; Antony, S.; Johnson, A.A.; Amin, R.; Roller, P.; 
Kvaratskhelia, M.; Pommier, Y. Covalent binding of the natural antimicrobial peptide indolicidin 
to DNA abasic sites. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006, 34, 5157–5165. 
131. Nicolas, P. Multifunctional host defense peptides: Intracellular-targeting antimicrobial peptides. 
FEBS J. 2009, 276, 6483–6496. 
132. Hilpert, K.; McLeod, B.; Yu, J.; Elliott, M.R.; Rautenbach, M.; Ruden, S.; Burck, J.; Muhle-Goll, C.; 
Ulrich, A.S.; Keller, S. et al. Short cationic antimicrobial peptides interact with ATP. 
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 2010, 54, 4480–4483. 
133. Boman, H.G.; Agerberth, B.; Boman, A. Mechanisms of action on Escherichia coli of cecropin 
p1 and pr-39, two antibacterial peptides from pig intestine. Infect. Immun. 1993, 61, 2978–2984. 
134. Xiong, Y.Q.; Yeaman, M.R.; Bayer, A.S. In vitro antibacterial activities of platelet microbicidal 
protein and neutrophil defensin against Staphylococcus aureus are influenced by antibiotics 
differing in mechanism of action. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 1999, 43, 1111–1117. 
135. Castle, M.; Nazarian, A.; Yi, S.S.; Tempst, P. Lethal effects of apidaecin on Escherichia coli 
involve sequential molecular interactions with diverse targets. J. Biol. Chem. 1999, 274,  
32555–32564. 
136. Nishikata, M.; Kanehira, T.; Oh, H.; Tani, H.; Tazaki, M.; Kuboki, Y. Salivary histatin as an 
inhibitor of a protease produced by the oral bacterium Bacteroides gingivalis. Biochem. Bioph. 
Res. Co. 1991, 174, 625–630. 
137. Couto, M.A.; Harwig, S.S.; Lehrer, R.I. Selective inhibition of microbial serine proteases by 
enap-2, an antimicrobial peptide from equine neutrophils. Infect. Immun. 1993, 61, 2991–2994. 
138. Keppi, E.; Pugsley, A.P.; Lambert, J.; Wicker, C.; Dimarcq, J.L.; Hoffmann, J.A.; Hoffmann, D. 
Mode of action of diptericin-a, a bactericidal peptide induced in the hemolymph of Phormia 
terranovae larvae. Arch. Insect Biochem. 1989, 10, 229–239. 
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1569 
 
 
139. Ishikawa, M.; Kubo, T.; Natori, S. Purification and characterization of a diptericin homologue 
from Sarcophaga peregrina (flesh fly). Biochem. J. 1992, 287, 573–578. 
140. Scheit, K.H.; Reddy, E.S.; Bhargava, P.M. Seminaplasmin is a potent inhibitor of E. coli RNA 
polymerase in vivo. Nature 1979, 279, 728–731. 
141. Chitnis, S.N.; Prasad, K.S.; Bhargava, P.M. Isolation and characterization of autolysis-defective 
mutants of Escherichia coli that are resistant to the lytic activity of seminalplasmin. J. Gen. 
Microbiol. 1990, 136, 463–469. 
142. Chitnis, S.N.; Prasad, K.S.; Bhargava, P.M. Bacteriolytic activity of seminalplasmin. J. Gen. 
Microbiol. 1987, 133, 1265–1271. 
143. Jones, A.T. Macropinocytosis: Searching for an endocytic identity and role in the uptake of cell 
penetrating peptides. J. Cell Mol. Med. 2007, 11, 670–684. 
144. Mayor, S.; Pagano, R.E. Pathways of clathrin-independent endocytosis. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 
2007, 8, 603–612. 
145. Kobayashi, S.; Takeshima, K.; Park, C.B.; Kim, S.C.; Matsuzaki, K. Interactions of the novel 
antimicrobial peptide buforin 2 with lipid bilayers: Proline as a translocation promoting factor. 
Biochemistry 2000, 39, 8648–8654. 
146. Park, C.B.; Yi, K.S.; Matsuzaki, K.; Kim, M.S.; Kim, S.C. Structure-activity analysis of  
buforin ii, a histone h2a-derived antimicrobial peptide: The proline hinge is responsible for the  
cell-penetrating ability of buforin ii. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2000, 97, 8245–8250. 
147. Tossi, A.; Sandri, L.; Giangaspero, A. Amphipathic, alpha-helical antimicrobial peptides. 
Biopolymers 2000, 55, 4–30. 
148. Westerhoff, H.V.; Juretic, D.; Hendler, R.W.; Zasloff, M. Magainins and the disruption of 
membrane-linked free-energy transduction. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1989, 86, 6597–6601. 
149. Subbalakshmi, C.; Nagaraj, R.; Sitaram, N. Biological activities of c-terminal 15-residue 
synthetic fragment of melittin: Design of an analog with improved antibacterial activity. FEBS Lett. 
1999, 448, 62–66. 
150. Park, Y.; Park, S.C.; Park, H.K.; Shin, S.Y.; Kim, Y.; Hahm, K.S. Structure-activity relationship 
of hp (2–20) analog peptide: Enhanced antimicrobial activity by n-terminal random coil region 
deletion. Biopolymers 2007, 88, 199–207. 
151. Oren, Z.; Shai, Y. A class of highly potent antibacterial peptides derived from pardaxin, a  
pore-forming peptide isolated from moses sole fish Pardachirus marmoratus. Eur. J. Biochem. 
1996, 237, 303–310. 
152. Pace, C.N.; Scholtz, J.M. A helix propensity scale based on experimental studies of peptides and 
proteins. Biophys. J. 1998, 75, 422–427. 
153. Lee, D.G.; Kim, H.N.; Park, Y.K.; Kim, H.K.; Choi, B.H.; Choi, C.H.; Hahm, K.S. Design of 
novel analogue peptides with potent antibiotic activity based on the antimicrobial peptide,  
hp (2–20), derived from n-terminus of Helicobacter pylori ribosomal protein L1. Biochim. 
Biophys. Acta 2002, 1598, 185–194. 
154. Kustanovich, I.; Shalev, D.E.; Mikhlin, M.; Gaidukov, L.; Mor, A. Structural requirements for 
potent versus selective cytotoxicity for antimicrobial dermaseptin s4 derivatives. J. Biol. Chem. 
2002, 277, 16941–16951. 
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1570 
 
 
155. Zelezetsky, I.; Pacor, S.; Pag, U.; Papo, N.; Shai, Y.; Sahl, H.G.; Tossi, A. Controlled alteration 
of the shape and conformational stability of alpha-helical cell-lytic peptides: Effect on mode of 
action and cell specificity. Biochem. J. 2005, 390, 177–188. 
156. Dathe, M.; Wieprecht, T.; Nikolenko, H.; Handel, L.; Maloy, W.L.; MacDonald, D.L.; 
Beyermann, M.; Bienert, M. Hydrophobicity, hydrophobic moment and angle subtended by 
charged residues modulate antibacterial and haemolytic activity of amphipathic helical peptides. 
FEBS Lett. 1997, 403, 208–212. 
157. Fernandez-Vidal, M.; Jayasinghe, S.; Ladokhin, A.S.; White, S.H. Folding amphipathic helices 
into membranes: Amphiphilicity trumps hydrophobicity. J. Mol. Biol. 2007, 370, 459–470. 
158. Chen, Y.; Mant, C.T.; Farmer, S.W.; Hancock, R.E.; Vasil, M.L.; Hodges, R.S. Rational design 
of alpha-helical antimicrobial peptides with enhanced activities and specificity/therapeutic index. 
J. Biol. Chem. 2005, 280, 12316–12329. 
159. Giangaspero, A.; Sandri, L.; Tossi, A. Amphipathic alpha helical antimicrobial peptides. Eur. J. 
Biochem. 2001, 268, 5589–5600. 
160. Ryan, L.; Lamarre, B.; Diu, T.; Ravi, J.; Judge, P.J.; Temple, A.; Carr, M.; Cerasoli, E.; Su, B.; 
Jenkinson, H.F. et al. Anti-antimicrobial peptides: Folding-mediated host defense antagonists.  
J. Biol. Chem. 2013, 288, 20162–20172. 
161. Tew, G.N.; Liu, D.; Chen, B.; Doerksen, R.J.; Kaplan, J.; Carroll, P.J.; Klein, M.L.; de Grado, W.F. 
De novo design of biomimetic antimicrobial polymers. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2002, 99, 
5110–5114. 
162. Goumon, Y.; Strub, J.M.; Moniatte, M.; Nullans, G.; Poteur, L.; Hubert, P.; van Dorsselaer, A.; 
Aunis, D.; Metz-Boutigue, M.H. The c-terminal bisphosphorylated proenkephalin-a-(209–237)-
peptide from adrenal medullary chromaffin granules possesses antibacterial activity. Eur. J. 
Biochem. 1996, 235, 516–525. 
163. Kreil, G. D-amino acids in animal peptides. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 1997, 66, 337–345. 
164. Kamatani, Y.; Minakata, H.; Nomoto, K.; Kim, K.H.; Yongsiri, A.; Takeuchi, H. Isolation of 
achatin-I, a neuroactive tetrapeptide having a D-phenylalanine residue, from Achatina ganglia, 
and its effects on Achatina giant neurones. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. C 1991, 98, 97–103. 
165. Hancock, R.E.; Chapple, D.S. Peptide antibiotics. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 1999, 43, 
1317–1323. 
166. Rifflet, A.; Gavalda, S.; Tene, N.; Orivel, J.; Leprince, J.; Guilhaudis, L.; Genin, E.; Vetillard, A.; 
Treilhou, M. Identification and characterization of a novel antimicrobial peptide from the venom 
of the ant Tetramorium bicarinatum. Peptides 2012, 38, 363–370. 
167. Oman, T.J.; Boettcher, J.M.; Wang, H.; Okalibe, X.N.; van der Donk, W.A. Sublancin is not a 
lantibiotic but an s-linked glycopeptide. Nat. Chem. Biol. 2011, 7, 78–80. 
168. Mangoni, M.E.; Aumelas, A.; Charnet, P.; Roumestand, C.; Chiche, L.; Despaux, E.; Grassy, G.; 
Calas, B.; Chavanieu, A. Change in membrane permeability induced by protegrin 1: Implication 
of disulphide bridges for pore formation. FEBS Lett. 1996, 383, 93–98. 
169. Shinnar, A.E.; Butler, K.L.; Park, H.J. Cathelicidin family of antimicrobial peptides: Proteolytic 
processing and protease resistance. Bioorg. Chem. 2003, 31, 425–436. 
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1571 
 
 
170. Yasin, B.; Pang, M.; Turner, J.S.; Cho, Y.; Dinh, N.N.; Waring, A.J.; Lehrer, R.I.; Wagar, E.A. 
Evaluation of the inactivation of infectious herpes simplex virus by host-defense peptides. Eur. J. 
Clin. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 2000, 19, 187–194. 
171. Rozek, A.; Powers, J.P.; Friedrich, C.L.; Hancock, R.E. Structure-based design of an indolicidin 
peptide analogue with increased protease stability. Biochemistry 2003, 42, 14130–14138. 
172. Osapay, K.; Tran, D.; Ladokhin, A.S.; White, S.H.; Henschen, A.H.; Selsted, M.E. Formation 
and characterization of a single trp-trp cross-link in indolicidin that confers protease stability 
without altering antimicrobial activity. J. Biol. Chem. 2000, 275, 12017–12022. 
173. Houston, M.E., Jr.; Kondejewski, L.H.; Karunaratne, D.N.; Gough, M.; Fidai, S.; Hodges, R.S.; 
Hancock, R.E. Influence of preformed alpha-helix and alpha-helix induction on the activity of 
cationic antimicrobial peptides. J. Pept. Res. 1998, 52, 81–88. 
174. Zhang, L.; Benz, R.; Hancock, R.E. Influence of proline residues on the antibacterial and 
synergistic activities of alpha-helical peptides. Biochemistry 1999, 38, 8102–8111. 
175. Nell, M.J.; Tjabringa, G.S.; Wafelman, A.R.; Verrijk, R.; Hiemstra, P.S.; Drijfhout, J.W.; Grote, J.J. 
Development of novel ll-37 derived antimicrobial peptides with LPS and LTA neutralizing and 
antimicrobial activities for therapeutic application. Peptides 2006, 27, 649–660. 
176. Goblyos, A.; Schimmel, K.J.; Valentijn, A.R.; Fathers, L.M.; Cordfunke, R.A.; Chan, H.L.; 
Oostendorp, J.; Nibbering, P.H.; Drijfhout, J.W.; Hiemstra, P.S.; et al. Development of a nose cream 
containing the synthetic antimicrobial peptide p60.4ac for eradication of methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus carriage. J. Pharm. Sci. 2013, 102, 3539–3544. 
177. Bessalle, R.; Kapitkovsky, A.; Gorea, A.; Shalit, I.; Fridkin, M. All-D-magainin: Chirality, 
antimicrobial activity and proteolytic resistance. FEBS Lett. 1990, 274, 151–155. 
178. Giuliani, A.; Rinaldi, A.C. Beyond natural antimicrobial peptides: Multimeric peptides and other 
peptidomimetic approaches. Cell Mol. Life Sci. 2011, 68, 2255–2266. 
179. Kim, J.Y.; Park, S.C.; Yoon, M.Y.; Hahm, K.S.; Park, Y. C-terminal amidation of pmap-23: 
Translocation to the inner membrane of gram-negative bacteria. Amino Acids 2011, 40, 183–195. 
180. Berthold, N.; Czihal, P.; Fritsche, S.; Sauer, U.; Schiffer, G.; Knappe, D.; Alber, G.; Hoffmann, R. 
Novel apidaecin 1b analogs with superior serum stabilities for treatment of infections by  
gram-negative pathogens. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 2013, 57, 402–409. 
181. Gupta, M.; Chauhan, V.S. De novo design of ,β-didehydrophenylalanine containing peptides: 
From models to applications. Biopolymers 2011, 95, 161–173. 
182. Mathur, P.; Jagannathan, N.R.; Chauhan, V.S. Alpha, beta-dehydrophenylalanine containing 
cecropin-melittin hybrid peptides: Conformation and activity. J. Pept. Sci. 2007, 13, 253–262. 
183. Torino, D.; Mollica, A.; Pinnen, F.; Feliciani, F.; Lucente, G.; Fabrizi, G.; Portalone, G.; Davis, P.; 
Lai, J.; Ma, S.W.; et al. Synthesis and evaluation of new endomorphin-2 analogues containing 
(z)-alpha,beta-didehydrophenylalanine (delta(z)phe) residues. J. Med. Chem. 2010, 53, 4550–4554. 
184. Avrahami, D.; Shai, Y. Bestowing antifungal and antibacterial activities by lipophilic acid 
conjugation to D,L-amino acid-containing antimicrobial peptides: A plausible mode of action. 
Biochemistry 2003, 42, 14946–14956. 
185. Schneider, G.; Schrodl, W.; Wallukat, G.; Muller, J.; Nissen, E.; Ronspeck, W.; Wrede, P.; 
Kunze, R. Peptide design by artificial neural networks and computer-based evolutionary search. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1998, 95, 12179–12184. 
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1572 
 
 
186. Fjell, C.D.; Jenssen, H.; Hilpert, K.; Cheung, W.A.; Pante, N.; Hancock, R.E.; Cherkasov, A. 
Identification of novel antibacterial peptides by chemoinformatics and machine learning. J. Med. 
Chem. 2009, 52, 2006–2015. 
187. Belda, I.; Llora, X.; Giralt, E. Evolutionary algorithms and de novo peptide design. Soft. Comput. 
2006, 10, 295–304. 
188. Loose, C.; Jensen, K.; Rigoutsos, I.; Stephanopoulos, G. A linguistic model for the rational 
design of antimicrobial peptides. Nature 2006, 443, 867–869. 
189. Jenssen, H.; Fjell, C.D.; Cherkasov, A.; Hancock, R.E. QSAR modeling and computer-aided 
design of antimicrobial peptides. J. Pept. Sci. 2008, 14, 110–114. 
190. Cherkasov, A.; Hilpert, K.; Jenssen, H.; Fjell, C.D.; Waldbrook, M.; Mullaly, S.C.; Volkmer, R.; 
Hancock, R.E. Use of artificial intelligence in the design of small peptide antibiotics effective 
against a broad spectrum of highly antibiotic-resistant superbugs. ACS Chem. Biol. 2009, 4, 65–74. 
191. Fjell, C.D.; Jenssen, H.; Cheung, W.A.; Hancock, R.E.; Cherkasov, A. Optimization of 
antibacterial peptides by genetic algorithms and cheminformatics. Chem. Biol. Drug Des. 2011, 
77, 48–56. 
192. Fjell, C.D.; Hiss, J.A.; Hancock, R.E.W.; Schneider, G. Designing antimicrobial peptides: Form 
follows function. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 2012, 11, 124–124. 
193. Tossi, A.; Tarantino, C.; Romeo, D. Design of synthetic antimicrobial peptides based on 
sequence analogy and amphipathicity. Eur. J. Biochem. 1997, 250, 549–558. 
194. Mor, A.; Nicolas, P. The nh2-terminal alpha-helical domain 1–18 of dermaseptin is responsible 
for antimicrobial activity. J. Biol. Chem. 1994, 269, 1934–1939. 
195. Storici, P.; Scocchi, M.; Tossi, A.; Gennaro, R.; Zanetti, M. Chemical synthesis and biological 
activity of a novel antibacterial peptide deduced from a pig myeloid cDNA. FEBS Lett. 1994, 
337, 303–307. 
196. Romani, A.A.; Baroni, M.C.; Taddei, S.; Ghidini, F.; Sansoni, P.; Cavirani, S.; Cabassi, C.S.  
In vitro activity of novel in silico-developed antimicrobial peptides against a panel of bacterial 
pathogens. J. Pept. Sci. 2013, 19, 554–565. 
197. Cruz, J.; Ortiz, C.C.; Guzman, F.; Cardenas, C.; Fernandez-Lafuente, R.; Torres, R.G. Design and 
activity of novel lactoferrampin analogues against O157:H7 enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli. 
Biopolymers 2013, doi:10.1002/bip.22360. 
198. Darouiche, R.O. Treatment of infections associated with surgical implants. N. Engl. J. Med. 
2004, 350, 1422–1429. 
199. Lewis, K. Riddle of biofilm resistance. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 2001, 45, 999–1007. 
200. Harro, J.M.; Peters, B.M.; O’May, G.A.; Archer, N.; Kerns, P.; Prabhakara, R.; Shirtliff, M.E. 
Vaccine development in Staphylococcus aureus: Taking the biofilm phenotype into consideration. 
FEMS Immunol. Med. Microbiol. 2010, 59, 306–323. 
201. Sutherland, I. Biofilm exopolysaccharides: A strong and sticky framework. Microbiology 2001, 
147, 3–9. 
202. Mah, T.F.; O’Toole, G.A. Mechanisms of biofilm resistance to antimicrobial agents. Trends 
Microbiol. 2001, 9, 34–39. 
203. Dunne, W.M.; Mason, E.O.; Kaplan, S.L. Diffusion of rifampin and vancomycin through a 
Staphylococcus epidermidis biofilm. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 1993, 37, 2522–2526. 
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1573 
 
 
204. Keren, I.; Kaldalu, N.; Spoering, A.; Wang, Y.P.; Lewis, K. Persister cells and tolerance to 
antimicrobials. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 2004, 234, 187–187. 
205. Stewart, P.S.; Costerton, J.W. Antibiotic resistance of bacteria in biofilms. Lancet 2001, 358, 
135–138. 
206. Yao, Y.; Sturdevant, D.E.; Otto, M. Genomewide analysis of gene expression in  
Staphylococcus epidermidis biofilms: Insights into the pathophysiology of S. epidermidis 
biofilms and the role of phenol-soluble modulins in formation of biofilms. J. Infect. Dis. 2005, 
191, 289–298. 
207. Otto, M. Bacterial evasion of antimicrobial peptides by biofilm formation. Curr. Top. Microbiol. 
Immunol. 2006, 306, 251–258. 
208. Singh, P.K.; Parsek, M.R.; Greenberg, E.P.; Welsh, M.J. A component of innate immunity 
prevents bacterial biofilm development. Nature 2002, 417, 552–555. 
209. Overhage, J.; Campisano, A.; Bains, M.; Torfs, E.C.; Rehm, B.H.; Hancock, R.E. Human host 
defense peptide ll-37 prevents bacterial biofilm formation. Infect. Immun. 2008, 76, 4176–4182. 
210. De la Fuente-Nunez, C.; Korolik, V.; Bains, M.; Nguyen, U.; Breidenstein, E.B.; Horsman, S.; 
Lewenza, S.; Burrows, L.; Hancock, R.E. Inhibition of bacterial biofilm formation and swarming 
motility by a small synthetic cationic peptide. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 2012, 56, 2696–2704. 
211. Gao, G.; Lange, D.; Hilpert, K.; Kindrachuk, J.; Zou, Y.; Cheng, J.T.; Kazemzadeh-Narbat, M.; 
Yu, K.; Wang, R.; Straus, S.K.; et al. The biocompatibility and biofilm resistance of implant 
coatings based on hydrophilic polymer brushes conjugated with antimicrobial peptides. 
Biomaterials 2011, 32, 3899–3909. 
212. Lucke, M.; Schmidmaier, G.; Sadoni, S.; Wildemann, B.; Schiller, R.; Haas, N.P.; Raschke, M. 
Gentamicin coating of metallic implants reduces implant-related osteomyelitis in rats. Bone 
2003, 32, 521–531. 
213. Price, J.S.; Tencer, A.F.; Arm, D.M.; Bohach, G.A. Controlled release of antibiotics from coated 
orthopedic implants. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 1996, 30, 281–286. 
214. Gollwitzer, H.; Ibrahim, K.; Meyer, H.; Mittelmeier, W.; Busch, R.; Stemberger, A. Antibacterial 
poly(D,L-lactic acid) coating of medical implants using a biodegradable drug delivery technology. 
J. Antimicrob. Chemoth. 2003, 51, 585–591. 
215. Yoshinari, M.; Kato, T.; Matsuzaka, K.; Hayakawa, T.; Shiba, K. Prevention of biofilm 
formation on titanium surfaces modified with conjugated molecules comprised of antimicrobial 
and titanium-binding peptides. Biofouling 2010, 26, 103–110. 
216. Helmerhorst, E.J.; Hodgson, R.; van’t Hof, W.; Veerman, E.C.; Allison, C.; Nieuw Amerongen, A.V. 
The effects of histatin-derived basic antimicrobial peptides on oral biofilms. J. Dent. Res. 1999, 
78, 1245–1250. 
217. Wei, G.X.; Campagna, A.N.; Bobek, L.A. Effect of muc7 peptides on the growth of bacteria and 
on Streptococcus mutans biofilm. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 2006, 57, 1100–1109. 
218. Chennupati, S.K.; Chiu, A.G.; Tamashiro, E.; Banks, C.A.; Cohen, M.B.; Bleier, B.S.;  
Kofonow, J.M.; Tam, E.; Cohen, N.A. Effects of an ll-37-derived antimicrobial peptide in an 
animal model of biofilm Pseudomonas sinusitis. Am. J. Rhinol. Allergy 2009, 23, 46–51. 
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1574 
 
 
219. Shigeta, M.; Tanaka, G.; Komatsuzawa, H.; Sugai, M.; Suginaka, H.; Usui, T. Permeation of 
antimicrobial agents through Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms: A simple method. Chemotherapy 
1997, 43, 340–345. 
220. Liu, Z.G.; Young, A.W.; Hu, P.; Rice, A.J.; Zhou, C.H.; Zhan, Y.K.; Kallenbach, N.R. Tuning 
the membrane selectivity of antimicrobial peptides by using multivalent design. ChemBioChem 
2007, 8, 2063–2065. 
221. Hou, S.Y.; Zhou, C.H.; Liu, Z.G.; Young, A.W.; Shi, Z.H.; Ren, D.C.; Kallenbach, N.R. 
Antimicrobial dendrimer active against Escherichia coli biofilms. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 
2009, 19, 5478–5481. 
222. Hou, S.; Liu, Z.; Young, A.W.; Mark, S.L.; Kallenbach, N.R.; Ren, D. Effects of trp- and  
arg-containing antimicrobial-peptide structure on inhibition of Escherichia coli planktonic 
growth and biofilm formation. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2010, 76, 1967–1974. 
223. Okuda, K.I.; Zendo, T.; Sugimoto, S.; Iwase, T.; Tajima, A.; Yamada, S.; Sonomoto, K.; 
Mizunoe, Y. Effects of bacteriocins on methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus biofilm. 
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 2013, 57, 5572–5579. 
224. Hirt, H.; Gorr, S.U. Antimicrobial peptide gl13k is effective in reducing biofilms of 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 2013, 57, 4903–4910. 
225. Gopal, R.; Lee, J.H.; Kim, Y.G.; Kim, M.S.; Seo, C.H.; Park, Y. Anti-microbial, anti-biofilm 
activities and cell selectivity of the nrc-16 peptide derived from witch flounder, Glyptocephalus 
cynoglossus. Mar. Drugs 2013, 11, 1836–1852. 
226. Leitch, E.C.; Willcox, M.D. Lactoferrin increases the susceptibility of S. epidermidis biofilms to 
lysozyme and vancomycin. Curr. Eye Res. 1999, 19, 12–19. 
227. Lewis, K. Persister cells. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 2010, 64, 357–372. 
228. Chen, X.; Zhang, M.; Zhou, C.; Kallenbach, N.R.; Ren, D. Control of bacterial persister cells by 
trp/arg-containing antimicrobial peptides. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2011, 77, 4878–4885. 
229. Yeaman, M.R.; Yount, N.Y. Mechanisms of antimicrobial peptide action and resistance. 
Pharmacol. Rev. 2003, 55, 27–55. 
230. Lewis, L.A.; Choudhury, B.; Balthazar, J.T.; Martin, L.E.; Ram, S.; Rice, P.A.; Stephens, D.S.; 
Carlson, R.; Shafer, W.M. Phosphoethanolamine substitution of lipid a and resistance of 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae to cationic antimicrobial peptides and complement-mediated killing by 
normal human serum. Infect. Immun. 2009, 77, 1112–1120. 
231. Gunn, J.S. Bacterial modification of LPS and resistance to antimicrobial peptides. J. Endotoxin Res. 
2001, 7, 57–62. 
232. Guo, L.; Lim, K.B.; Poduje, C.M.; Daniel, M.; Gunn, J.S.; Hackett, M.; Miller, S.I. Lipid a 
acylation and bacterial resistance against vertebrate antimicrobial peptides. Cell 1998, 95, 189–198. 
233. Guina, T.; Yi, E.C.; Wang, H.; Hackett, M.; Miller, S.I. A phop-regulated outer membrane 
protease of Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium promotes resistance to alpha-helical 
antimicrobial peptides. J. Bacteriol. 2000, 182, 4077–4086. 
234. Shafer, W.M.; Qu, X.; Waring, A.J.; Lehrer, R.I. Modulation of Neisseria gonorrhoeae 
susceptibility 
to 
vertebrate 
antibacterial 
peptides 
due 
to 
a 
member 
of 
the 
resistance/nodulation/division efflux pump family. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1998, 95, 1829–1833. 
Pharmaceuticals 2013, 6 
1575 
 
 
235. Del Castillo, F.J.; del Castillo, I.; Moreno, F. Construction and characterization of mutations at 
codon 751 of the Escherichia coli gyrB gene that confer resistance to the antimicrobial peptide 
microcin b17 and alter the activity of DNA gyrase. J. Bacteriol. 2001, 183, 2137–2140. 
236. Friedrich, C.; Scott, M.G.; Karunaratne, N.; Yan, H.; Hancock, R.E. Salt-resistant alpha-helical 
cationic antimicrobial peptides. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 1999, 43, 1542–1548. 
237. Yeaman, M.R.; Bayer, A.S.; Koo, S.P.; Foss, W.; Sullam, P.M. Platelet microbicidal proteins and 
neutrophil defensin disrupt the Staphylococcus aureus cytoplasmic membrane by distinct 
mechanisms of action. J. Clin. Invest. 1998, 101, 178–187. 
238. Vuong, C.; Voyich, J.M.; Fischer, E.R.; Braughton, K.R.; Whitney, A.R.; DeLeo, F.R.; Otto, M. 
Polysaccharide intercellular adhesin (pia) protects Staphylococcus epidermidis against major 
components of the human innate immune system. Cell Microbiol. 2004, 6, 269–275. 
239. Miller, S.I.; Kukral, A.M.; Mekalanos, J.J. A two-component regulatory system (phop phoq) 
controls Salmonella typhimurium virulence. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1989, 86, 5054–5058. 
© 2013 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article 
distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/). 
